https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bedfordshire_County_Cricket_Club
Bedfordshire County Cricket Club
2022-07-03 00:00:00
Bedfordshire County Cricket Club Personnel Captain James Middlebrook Manager Paul Oakins Team information Founded 1899 Home ground Various History Minor Counties Championship wins 2 MCCA Knockout Trophy wins 1 Official website Bedfordshire CCC Bedfordshire County Cricket Club is one of 20 Minor County clubs within the domestic cricket structure of England and Wales. It represents the historic county of Bedfordshire . The team is currently a member of the Minor Counties Championship Eastern Division and plays in the MCCA Knockout Trophy . Bedfordshire played List A matches occasionally from 1967 until 2005 but is not classified as a List A team. Contents 1 History 1.1 Honours 2 Notable players 3 Grounds 4 References 5 External links History [ edit ] Cricket had probably reached Bedfordshire by the end of the 17th century. [ citation needed ] The earliest reference to cricket in the county is a match in August 1741 at Woburn Park between a Bedfordshire XI and a combined Northants and Huntingdonshire XI. Woburn Cricket Club, under the leadership of the Duke of Bedford , became prominent in the 1740s and took part in a number of "great matches" against opponents such as London Cricket Club . [ citation needed ] A county organisation has been traced back to May 1847 and a Bedfordshire team competed in the first Minor Counties Championship in 1895, with six other teams: it finished fourth. The county then missed the next four seasons before the current Bedfordshire County Cricket Club was founded on 3 November 1899, at which point it rejoined the competition in 1900. It has not missed any seasons since. Honours [ edit ] The county has won the Minor Counties Championship twice, in 1970 and in 1972, and shared the title in 2004 after drawing the title playoff match against Devon . The MCCA Knockout Trophy was won in 1999. Minor Counties Championship (2) - 1970, 1972; shared (1) - 2004 MCCA Knockout Trophy (1) - 1999 Notable players [ edit ] See List of Bedfordshire County Cricket Club List A players and Category:Bedfordshire cricketers The following Bedfordshire cricketers also made an impact on the first-class game: Louis Bookman Tom Clark Alastair Cook Alan Fordham Alf Gover Wayne Larkins Geoff Millman Monty Panesar Andy Roberts Will Smith Graeme Swann Alex Wakely David Willey Rex Alston , who captained the side in 1932, subsequently became famous as a BBC radio commentator on cricket and other sports. Grounds [ edit ] Main article: List of Bedfordshire County Cricket Club grounds The club have no fixed home, but most of their matches are played in Wardown Park , Luton . Other recently used grounds include: Ampthill Park, Ampthill The Vale, Flitwick Goldington Bury , Bedford Lancot Park , Dunstable Southill Park Cricket Club, Southill Bedford Modern School , Bedford Bedford School , Bedford References [ edit ] ^ "List A events played by Bedfordshire" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 7 January 2016 . ^ Waghorn HT (1899) Cricket Scores, Notes, etc. (1730-1773) , p.27. Blackwood. ^ Bowen (1970) Cricket: A History of its Growth and Development , p.274. Eyre & Spottiswoode. External links [ edit ] Bedfordshire County Cricket Club v t e Bedfordshire County Cricket Club Bedfordshire County Cricket Club Bedfordshire Women Players List A players Category:Bedfordshire cricketers Grounds Current grounds Wardown Park, Luton Ampthill Park The Vale, Flitwick Lancot Park, Dunstable Southill Park Cricket Club Bedford Modern School Ground Bedford School Previous grounds Dunstable Grammar School Ground Bell Close, Leighton Buzzard Bedford County School Ground Luton Hoo Park WH Allen's Sports Ground, Biddenham Goldington Road, Bedford Goldington Bury, Bedford Southill Park Bull Pond Lane, Dunstable Vauxhall Motors Ground, Luton The Pyghties, Henlow Grange Lane, Cople The Vale, Westoning ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Bedfordshire County Cricket Club captains Records Bedfordshire List A cricket records v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight 
