https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/County_cricket
County cricket
2022-09-24 00:00:00
Cricket matches between the historic counties of England and Wales This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "County cricket" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) This article needs to be updated . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Counties of county cricket in England and Wales. County Championship Division One counties County Championship Division Two counties National counties Inter- county cricket matches are known to have been played since the early 18th century, involving teams that are representative of the historic counties of England and Wales . Since the late 19th century, there have been two county championship competitions played at different levels: the County Championship , a first-class competition which involves eighteen first-class county clubs among which seventeen are English and one is from Wales; and the National Counties Championship , which involves nineteen English county clubs and one club that represents several Welsh counties. Contents 1 History 1.1 Development of county cricket 1.2 Modern county cricket 2 Teams 2.1 First-class counties 2.2 Other teams with first-class status 2.2.1 MCC 2.2.2 MCC Universities 2.3 National counties 2.4 Other teams 3 Qualification rules 4 Competitions 4.1 First-class cricket 4.2 One-day cricket 4.3 Twenty20 cricket 4.4 National counties cricket 4.5 Women's County Cricket 5 References History [ edit ] County cricket started in the eighteenth century, the earliest known inter-county match being played in 1709, though an official County Championship was not instituted until 1890. Development of county cricket [ edit ] Inter-county cricket was popular throughout the 18th century, although the best teams, such as Kent in the 1740s or Hampshire in the days of the famous Hambledon Club , were usually acknowledged as such by being matched against All-England . The most successful county teams were Hampshire, Kent, Middlesex , Surrey and Sussex . There was, however, often a crossover between town and county with some strong local clubs tending at times to represent a whole county. Examples are London , which often played against county teams and was in some respects almost a county club in itself; Slindon , which was for a few years in the 1740s effectively representative of Sussex as a county; Dartford , sometimes representative of Kent; and the Hambledon Club , certainly representative of Hampshire and also perhaps of Sussex. One of the best county teams in the late 18th century was Berkshire , which no longer has first-class status. Modern county cricket [ edit ] All matches prior to 1988 were scheduled for three days, normally of a nominal six hours each plus intervals, but often with the first two days lengthened by up to an hour and the final day shortened, so that teams with fixtures elsewhere on the following day could travel at sensible hours. The exception to this was the 1919 season, when there was an experiment with two-day matches played over longer hours, up to nine o'clock in the evening in mid-summer. This experiment was not repeated. From 1988 to 1992 some matches were played over four days. From 1993 onward, all matches have been scheduled for four days. Teams [ edit ] First-class counties [ edit ] Yorkshire v Surrey at Headingley , Leeds in 2005 The eighteen first-class counties are the top league cricket teams. They are named after historic English counties and include one Welsh county . The first-class counties are: Derbyshire Durham Essex Glamorgan Gloucestershire Hampshire Kent Lancashire Leicestershire Middlesex Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Somerset Surrey Sussex Warwickshire Worcestershire Yorkshire The full name of each club is the name of the county followed by the words County Cricket Club, often abbreviated as CCC. Other teams with first-class status [ edit ] MCC [ edit ] The opening first-class game of an English county cricket season has traditionally been played at Lord's between the MCC and the Champion County (the club that won the County Championship the previous year). When the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) plays against one of the first-class counties, the game is granted first-class status. MCC Universities [ edit ] The six MCC-sponsored University (MCCU) teams, were until 2020 also afforded first-class status for some of their matches against a first-class county. They were: Cambridge University (1827–2020) Oxford University (1827–2020) Cambridge MCCU (2001–2019) Oxford MCCU (2001–2019) Durham MCCU (2001–2019) Loughborough MCCU (2003–2019) Cardiff MCCU (2012–2019) Leeds/Bradford MCCU (2012–2019) Most of the first-class counties play three-day games against university cricket teams in the early part of the English cricket season. This is partly because the start of the cricket season coincides with the end of the university academic year, and partly because the games act as pre-season warm-ups for the county clubs. National counties [ edit ] Main article: National Counties of English and Welsh cricket The National Counties, known prior to 2020 as the Minor Counties, are the cricketing counties of England that are not afforded first-class status.  A further team represents the counties of Wales other than Glamorgan. Present members are: Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumberland Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales Wiltshire Other teams [ edit ] Some teams outside of the English counties have been allowed to take part in some English county cricket one-day competitions. They include: Ireland Netherlands Scotland Denmark Unicorns There are no representative teams carrying the names of the historic counties of Westmorland , Rutland , and Huntingdonshire . Qualification rules [ edit ] An important year was 1873, when player qualification rules came into force, requiring players to choose at the start of each season whether they would play for the county of their birth or their county of residence. Before this, it was quite common for a player to play for both counties during the course of a single season. Three meetings were held, and at the last of these, held at The Oval on 9 June 1873, the following rules were decided on: That no cricketer, whether amateur or professional, shall play for more than one county during the same season. Every cricketer born in one county and residing in another shall be free to choose at the commencement of each season for which of those counties he will play, and shall, during that season, play for the one county only. A cricketer shall be qualified to play for the county in which he is residing and has resided for the previous two years: or a cricketer may elect to play for the county in which his family home is, so long as it remains open to him as an occasional residence. That should any question arise as to the residential qualification, the same shall be left to the decision of the Marylebone Cricket Club . Competitions [ edit ] First-class cricket [ edit ] Main article: County Championship The County Championship is the domestic first-class cricket competition in England and Wales. The tournament currently has a two-division format with ten counties in Division One and eight in Division Two. One-day cricket [ edit ] The Royal London One-Day Cup is a 50 over one-day cricket competition in county cricket. The 18 English county sides are divided randomly into two groups of nine with each team playing each other once. The top four in each group reach the quarter-finals. The competition culminates at Lord's for the final. The Royal London One Day Cup replaced the Yorkshire Bank 40 over League. The first winners of the competition were Durham in 2014. Twenty20 cricket [ edit ] The Twenty20 Cup is the top Twenty20 cricket competition contested by the eighteen first-class counties. The games are limited to 20 overs per side, and the emphasis is on fast action. From 2018, the competition is called Vitality Blast for sponsorship reasons. National counties cricket [ edit ] Main article: National Counties of English and Welsh cricket The competitions of national counties cricket are the National Counties Cricket Championship and the NCCA Knockout Trophy . Women's County Cricket [ edit ] The Women's County Championship is played each year, in a similar manner to the men's, but the Women's county game focuses upon 50 over cricket. There is also the Women's Cricket Super League , a T20 competition. Some counties are involved, and feature in a divisional structure. Promotion and relegation is a feature throughout. References [ edit ] ^ "MCC Universities" . ecb.co.uk . Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. ^ Christopher Martin-Jenkins, The Wisden Book of County Cricket , Queen Anne Press, 1981. ISBN 0-362-00545-1 , p. 17. ^ "The home of the England and Wales Cricket Board" . English Cricket Board . Retrieved 24 September 2022 . ^ "Royal London One-Day Cup" . ecb.co.uk . ^ "Vitality Blast" . ecb.co.uk . ^ "NCCA" . play-cricket.com . ^ ECB Women's One-Day Championship & County T20 Retrieved 25 April 2015 v t e English and Welsh first-class cricket clubs Current first-class county teams Derbyshire Durham Essex Glamorgan Gloucestershire Hampshire Kent Lancashire Leicestershire Middlesex Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Somerset Surrey Sussex Warwickshire Worcestershire Yorkshire Other current first-class teams England Lions Marylebone Cricket Club v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight v t e Cricket in England England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) National teams Men Women England Lions U-19 Associations Professional Cricketers' Association Association of Cricket Officials First Class Counties (18) Derbyshire Durham Essex Glamorgan Gloucestershire Hampshire Kent Lancashire Leicestershire Middlesex Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Somerset Surrey Sussex Warwickshire Worcestershire Yorkshire Other first-class teams Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) MCC Universities (6) Cambridge MCCU Cardiff MCCU Durham MCCU Leeds/Bradford MCCU Loughborough MCCU Oxford MCCU The Hundred teams (8) (Men and Women) Birmingham Phoenix London Spirit Manchester Originals Northern Superchargers Oval Invincibles Southern Brave Trent Rockets Welsh Fire Major competitions County Championship Bob Willis Trophy Royal London One-Day Cup T20 Blast The Hundred Rachael Heyhoe Flint Trophy Charlotte Edwards Cup Women's Twenty20 Cup Defunct major competitions ECB 40 National League Benson & Hedges Cup Friends Provident Trophy Women's County Championship Women's Cricket Super League Grounds Derby Chelmsford Colchester Canterbury Cheltenham Leicester Northampton Hove Guildford Lord's The Oval Old Trafford Trent Bridge Headingley Edgbaston Riverside Sophia Gardens Scarborough Rose Bowl Bristol Taunton Tunbridge Wells Worcester Fenner's The Parks Loughborough Others National Counties (21) Bedfordshire Berkshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cheshire Cornwall Cumbria Devon Dorset Herefordshire Hertfordshire Huntingdonshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Oxfordshire Shropshire Staffordshire Suffolk Wiltshire Wales National County National counties competitions National Counties Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 National Club Cricket ECB Premier Leagues ECB National Club Cricket Championship ECB National Club Twenty20 Lists Test cricket records Test cricketers Captains Test wicket-keepers ODI cricket records ODI cricketers T20I cricket records T20I cricketers Women Test Women ODI Women T20I Grounds by capacity Winners of all trophies Other Timeline of cricket on UK television Category 
