https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cumbria_County_Cricket_Club
Cumbria County Cricket Club
2022-07-06 00:00:00
Cumbria County Cricket Club Team information Founded 1948 Home ground Edenside Ground History MCCC wins 3 MCCAT wins 2 FP Trophy wins 0 Official website Cumbria County Cricket Club Cumbria County Cricket Club (formerly Cumberland County Cricket Club ) is one of twenty minor county clubs within the domestic cricket structure of England and Wales . Originally, it represented the historic counties of Cumberland and Westmorland . It now represents the ceremonial county of Cumbria , as defined by the Lieutenancies Act 1997 . Cumbria was first created in 1974 as an administrative county by combining the traditional counties of Cumberland and Westmorland along with Furness (formerly a district in Lancashire ) and a small part of north-west Yorkshire . The team is currently a member of the National Counties Cricket Championship Eastern Division and plays in the NCCA Knockout Trophy . Cumbria played List A matches occasionally from 1984 until 2004 but is not classified as a List A team per se . The club is based at the Edenside Ground , Carlisle and also plays matches around Cumbria at various places including Workington , Penrith , Netherfield Cricket Club Ground in Kendal and Barrow-in-Furness .  Carlisle, Workington and Penrith are all in the traditional county of Cumberland; Kendal is in the traditional county of Westmorland; and Barrow is traditionally in the Furness district of Lancashire. Contents 1 Honours 2 History 3 Notable players 4 Grounds 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Honours [ edit ] Minor Counties Championship (3) - 1986, 1999; 2015 shared (0) - MCCA Knockout Trophy (2) - 1989, 2012 History [ edit ] Cricket probably reached Cumberland and Westmorland during the 18th century. The earliest references to cricket in the region are in 1827 (Westmorland) and 1828 (Cumberland). According to Rowland Bowen 's research, there was reportedly an informal county club in Westmorland about 1835. It is known that a county organisation was established on 2 January 1884. The club formed on 10 April 1948 and has been renamed twice: Cumberland and Westmorland County Cricket Club Cumberland County Cricket Club: when it was admitted to the Minor Counties Championship for the 1955 season. As Cumberland it won the MCCA Knockout Trophy once in 1989 and the Minor Counties Championship three times, in 1986, 1999 and 2015 Cumbria County Cricket Club : from 1 January 2021. Notable players [ edit ] See also: List of Cumberland CCC List A players The following Cumberland cricketers also made an impact on the first-class game: Ian Austin Leonard Baichan David Lloyd Ashley Metcalfe Graham Monkhouse Gary Pratt Dean Hodgson Mike Burns Grounds [ edit ] For a complete list of grounds used by Cumbria, see List of Cumbria County Cricket Club grounds . References [ edit ] ^ "List A events played by Cumberland" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 7 January 2016 . ^ a b Bowen, p. 270. ^ Bowen, p. 290. Further reading [ edit ] Rowland Bowen , Cricket: A History of its Growth and Development , Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970 E W Swanton (editor), Barclays World of Cricket , Guild, 1986 Playfair Cricket Annual – various editions Wisden Cricketers' Almanack – various editions External links [ edit ] Cumberland CCC at England and Wales Cricket Board Cumberland County Cricket Club website (archived May 2017) v t e Cumbria County Cricket Club Cumbria County Cricket Club Cumbria Women Players Current squad List A players Category:Cumberland cricketers Grounds Current grounds Sedbergh School, Sedbergh Furness Park, Barrow-in-Furness Shap Road, Kendal Sandair, Cockermouth Previous grounds Edenside, Carlisle Fitz Park, Keswick The Playground, Whitehaven Ernest Valentine Ground, Workington Parkside Road, Kendal St George's Road, Millom Vicars Croft, Appleby-in-Westmorland Shap Road, Kendal United Steel Ground, Workington Ernest Pass Memorial Ground, Barrow-in-Furness Vicarage Close, Appleby-in-Westmorland Duddon Sports Club Ground, Askam-in-Furness ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Cumberland County Cricket Club captains Records Cumberland List A cricket records v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight Authority control General VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries United States This article about a cricket team in England is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e 
