https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epping_Forest
Epping Forest
2022-12-05 00:00:00
Ancient woodland and former royal forest in Essex and Greater London This article is about the woodland in England. For other uses, see Epping Forest (disambiguation) . Epping Forest Site of Special Scientific Interest Epping Forest near Epping Location Greater London Essex Grid reference TL475035 to TQ 405865 Interest Biological Area SSSI : 4,270 acres (1,730 ha) Total: circa 5,900 acres (2,400 ha) Notification 1990 Location map Magic Map Location of Epping Forest (shown in green) within Greater London and Essex The green line shows the boundaries of the various compartments of Epping Forest SSSI.
The three visitor centres are: 1 Epping Forest Gateway, which includes Queen Elizabeth Hunting Lodge & The View visitor centre 2 Epping Forest Visitor Centre, High Beach 3 The Temple, Wanstead Park, visitor centre Epping Forest is a 2,400-hectare (5,900-acre) area of ancient woodland , and other established habitats, which straddles the border between Greater London and Essex . The main body of the forest stretches from Epping in the north, to Chingford on the edge of the London built-up area. South of Chingford the forest narrows, and forms a green corridor that extends deep into East London , as far as Forest Gate ; the Forest's position gives rise to its nickname, the Cockney Paradise . It lies on a ridge between the valleys of the rivers Lea and Roding . It contains areas of woodland, grassland, heath, streams, bogs and ponds, and its elevation and thin gravelly soil (the result of glaciation) historically made it less suitable for agriculture. The Forest was historically managed as a common; the land was held by a number of local landowners who exercised economic rights over aspects such as timber, while local commoners had grazing and other rights. It was designated a royal forest meaning that only the monarch had the right to hunt deer. The extensive urban areas on the Forest's doorstep bring many visitors to the Forest, and cause a strain on the Forest's ecology; however local recreational users of the Forest were crucial in saving the Forest when it was threatened with enclosure and destruction in the late 19th century. The huge public outcry led the City of London Corporation to buy and so save the site in what was the first major success of the environmental movement in Europe - the Corporation still owns the Forest. This environmental milestone came at a cost, as the City of London's early conservators did not understand the human processes that shaped the forest and its ecosystems, and discontinued the practice of pollarding trees while allowing grazing to decline. This changed the character of the Forest and has led to reduced biodiversity. The modern Conservators are mindful of these historic errors but it is probably not possible to reverse the effects of this long interruption of historic management methods. [ citation needed ] The Forest gives its name to the Epping Forest local government district , which covers part of it. Contents 1 The History of Epping Forest 1.1 Early History 1.2 Management of Forest 1.3 Queen Elizabeth's Hunting Lodge 1.4 17th to 19th centuries 1.5 Fighting enclosure 1.6 "The People's Forest" 2 Geography 3 Ecology and habitats 3.1 Wood pasture 3.2 Plains 3.3 Restoration work 3.4 Lakes and ponds 3.5 Fauna 3.5.1 Deer 4 Planning designations 5 Leisure activities 6 Visitor centres 7 Public transport 8 Cultural associations 8.1 Fine art 8.2 Literature 8.3 Music 8.4 Television 8.5 Cinema 9 Crime 9.1 Murders 10 See also 11 References 12 Sources 12.1 Books 12.2 Articles 13 External links The History of Epping Forest [ edit ] Early History [ edit ] The area that became Epping Forest has been continuously wooded since Neolithic times. Embankments of two Iron Age earthworks – Loughton Camp and Ambresbury Banks – can be found in the woodland, but pollen profiles show that Iron Age occupation had no significant effect on woodland cover. The former small leaved lime (also known as pry or linden) dominated woodland permanently changed during the Anglo-Saxon period, possibly as a result of the selective cutting of trees. Today's beech - birch and oak - hornbeam -dominated forest may be the result of partial forest clearance in Saxon times. Management of Forest [ edit ] The area is thought to have been given legal status as a royal forest by Henry II in the 12th century. At the time it was part of the much larger Forest of Essex , which covered nearly all of the county. The term Forest was a legal term, meaning that Forest Law applied, meaning that only the King had the right to hunt deer. The term did not mean the land was well wooded: the large majority of the Forest of Essex was agricultural land. The Forest of Essex gradually shrank in size as land was removed from Forest Law and it was replaced by a number of much smaller forests including Waltham Forest (which gives its name to the modern London Borough of Waltham Forest . Waltham Forest was a legally defined area which included the areas later known as Epping Forest and Hainault Forest ; the rest of the Waltham Forest area was only lightly wooded. In physical terms (rather than legal terms), the Forest is thought to have declined to something like its modern extent in the early fourteenth century (possibly long before), the Black Death reached England in 1348, leading to a huge decline in population, perhaps between a third and a half, which took away the pressure on woods and commons, leading to a very long period of stability in the area of these land uses in England. At that time the Forest extended slightly further south to the Romford Road in the Forest Gate area of West Ham , this is the originally Roman A118 road from Aldgate on the City of London wall to Stratford , Romford and Colchester . There was a coppice woodland on the Romford Road called Hamfrith Wood (meaning the woodland belonging to the Ham area) until around 1700, and an area of plain called Hamfrith Waste which lasted into the mid 1800's. Most of Waltham Forest was later legally deforested (removed form Forest Law) leaving two smaller forests, Epping Forest and Hainault Forest , both of which continued to be very heavily wooded - there was not a reduction in the physical area of woods and commons. The name "Epping Forest" was first recorded in the 17th century. Although the monarch held hunting and associated rights, the land was owned by a number of local landowners. It was managed as a common where landowners benefitted from certain rights, while local commoners benefitted from common rights allowing them to gather firewood and foodstuffs, to graze livestock and turn out pigs for mast . The landscape was primarily a mixture of wood-pasture and open plains, rather than thick woodland, and both of these land use types were grazed by cattle. Queen Elizabeth 's Hunting Lodge, Chingford Queen Elizabeth's Hunting Lodge [ edit ] In Tudor times, Henry VIII and Queen Elizabeth I may have hunted in the forest, though no documentary evidence has survived to prove it. In 1543, Henry commissioned a building, known as Great Standing, from which to view the chase at Chingford . The building was renovated in 1589 for Queen Elizabeth I and can still be seen today in Chingford. The building is now known as Queen Elizabeth's Hunting Lodge , and is open to the public. There is another hunt standing, which now forms the core of the Forest HQ at the Warren, Loughton . 17th to 19th centuries [ edit ] Following the Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660, although the deer herd was restocked, royal hunting in the forest never recommenced. The forest was principally used as a source of shipbuilding timber for the Royal Navy , which was taken overland to Barking Creek and then floated in rafts to the Royal Dockyards at Woolwich and Deptford . This exploitation continued until about 1725, when all the suitable oak trees had been felled. The City of London maintained the ancient tradition of an Easter Monday stag hunt in the forest, but official participation ended in 1807 when the office of Master of the City Hounds was abolished. In 1827, the huntsman of Sir William Pole-Tylney-Long-Wellesley chased a forest stag as far as West Ham . The customary Easter Monday hunt was repeated annually by a large and rowdy crowd of ordinary London tradesmen and working people, who gathered at Fairmead Oak to chase a previously captured stag, which was released from a cart and usually escaped unharmed. The last of these hunts was in 1882 when it descended into a riot and had to be dispersed by the police. In the 1830's, the Forest took its first significant harm in centuries when a new road, the Epping New Road was built through the Forest, to supplement pre-existing ancient roads. In 1830, civil engineer James Nicoll McAdam , the son of John Loudon McAdam , was engaged by a turnpike trust , the Epping and Ongar Highway Trust, to construct a road from Woodford Green to Epping through the heart of the forest, to avoid Goldings Hill on the old road through Loughton and shorten the distance by one mile. The Epping New Road , now part of the A104 was completed in 1834. With the arrival of railway stations in towns close to the forest from the 1850s, the working class people of East London began to use the forest for recreation on Sundays and public holidays, in ever increasing numbers. Others arrived by horsebus which could drive directly to popular spots like High Beach. On Whit Monday 1880, a parliamentary committee estimated that up to 400,000 people had visited Epping Forest on that day. Fighting enclosure [ edit ] The marks used by the Reeves of Epping Forest to brand Commoner's cattle turned out to graze in the "forest. wastes". The marks demote the parishes entitled to this right, and consist of a letter surmounted by crown or a cross. In the first decades of the 19th century, the Lord Warden of Epping Forest, William Long-Wellesley, acquiesced to the enclosure of 3,000 acres (1,200 ha) of forest land, about a third of the remaining total, by the lords of the manors who held freeholds in the forest. The government was keen to enclose land for farming and building development and allowed the Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues to sell off further freeholds in the forest. In 1851 nearby Hainault Forest , where the Crown owned most of the land, was privatised (enclosed) and nearly all of the trees grubbed out in order to turn the area into poor quality farmland. The modern conservation movement grew out of public disgust at the destruction of Hainault Forest and the need to protect its sister forest , Epping Forest. Epping Forest had fragmented ownership which made it harder to enclose in the same way, though individual landowners began to make encroachments. The urbanisation of nearby areas increased the Forest's importance as an area of public recreation helped lead to the establishment of the Open Spaces Society in 1865, whose aim was to protect commons in and around London. By 1870, the unenclosed forest had shrunk to only 3,500 acres (1,400 ha). One landowner, Reverend John Whitaker Maitland, who had enclosed 1,100 acres (450 ha) in his manor of Loughton, was engaged in a long running dispute with a commoner called Thomas Willingale and his family, who insisted on maintaining his right to lop trees in the forest, despite inducements offered for him to stop. The matter came to the public attention in 1866, when Willingale's son and two nephews were fined for damaging Maitland's trees, and were sent to prison for seven days when they refused to pay. Willingale was encouraged to continue the dispute by Edward Buxton and other members of the Commons Preservation Society , however a court action against Maitland lapsed in 1870 when Willingale died. In July 1871, a large crowd gathered on Wanstead Flats to protest about fences which had been erected there by Earl Cowley to enclose forest land; after the police had left, the fences were broken down and smashed. At this stage the City of London Corporation became involved, since in 1853, the City had purchased a farm at Manor Park for the construction of the City of London Cemetery ; this made the City Corporation a forest commoner with the right to graze cattle in the forest. In 1871, the City brought a suit against 16 of the lords of the forest manors, claiming that the enclosures impinged on their ancient grazing rights. Following an appeal in 1874, a judgment by the Master of the Rolls , Sir George Jessel , ruled that all enclosures made since 1851 were illegal. Subsequently, two acts of Parliament in 1871 and 1872 allowed the City to purchase the 19 forest manors. The consequence of this victory was that only 10% of Epping Forest had been lost to enclosure (mainly in the south), compared to 92% of Hainault Forest. Under the terms of the Epping Forest Act 1878 , the forest ceased to be a royal forest and was purchased by the City of London Corporation whose Epping Forest Committee act as Conservators . The Committee is composed of twelve members of the Court of Common Council and four Verderers who are residents of the forest and are elected by the Commoners. A Superintendent is responsible for operational management, supported by twelve Epping Forest Keepers . In addition, the Crown's right to venison was terminated, and pollarding was no longer allowed, although grazing rights continued. This act laid down a stipulation that the Conservators "shall at all times keep Epping Forest unenclosed and unbuilt on as an open space for the recreation and enjoyment of the people". In compensation for the loss of lopping rights, Lopping Hall in Loughton was built as a community building. This was the first major victory, in Europe, for the modern conservation movement. "The People's Forest" [ edit ] Connaught Water, an ornamental lake of 8 acres (3.2 ha) named after the Duke of Connaught , the first forest ranger When Queen Victoria visited Chingford on 6 May 1882 she declared "It gives me the greatest satisfaction to dedicate this beautiful forest to the use and enjoyment of my people for all time" and it thus became "The People's Forest". The City of London Corporation still manages Epping Forest in strict conformity with the Epping Forest Act. This care is funded from ' City's Cash ', the private funds of the Corporation rather than any money for its upkeep coming from local rates or taxes. The Conservators administer the forest from The Warren, modern offices built in the grounds of Grade II* listed Warren House, Loughton . Warren House, formerly known as the Reindeer Inn, was built around a smaller hunt standing, known as the Little Standing. Its grounds were redesigned by Humphry Repton in the early 19th century. Until the outbreak of BSE in 1996 commoners still exercised their right to graze cattle and every summer herds of cattle would roam freely in the southern part of the forest. Cattle were reintroduced in 2001 but their movements are now more restricted to reduce conflict with traffic. Commoners, who are people who live in a Forest parish and own 0.5 acres (0.20 ha) of land, can still register and graze cattle during the summer months. The right to collect wood still exists but is rarely practised and is limited to "one faggot of dead or driftwood" per day per adult resident. Originally a barn built in the mid-19th century the Grade II listed building Butler's Retreat is one of the few remaining Victorian retreats within the forest. The building, which  is adjacent to the Queen Elizabeth Hunting Lodge, takes its name from the 1891 occupier John Butler. Retreats originally served non-alcoholic refreshments as part of the Temperance movement . After closing in 2009 the building was refurbished by the City of London Corporation and re-opened as a café in 2012. On 12 July 2012 The Duke of Gloucester —the official Epping Forest Ranger—opened the View interpretation centre at Chingford. The building, a former Victorian coach house and stables, together with Queen Elizabeth's Hunting Lodge and Butler's Retreat form the Epping Forest Gateway. Geography [ edit ] The forest is approximately 19 kilometres (12 mi) long in the north-south direction, but no more than 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from east to west at its widest point, and in most places considerably narrower. The main body of the forest stretches from Epping in the north, to Chingford on the edge of the London built-up area. South of Chingford the forest narrows, and forms a green corridor that extends deep into East London, as far as Forest Gate . The southern part of the forest was always narrower but enclosure and other destruction in the 19th and 20th centuries mean that this is now more pronounced. The southernmost point of the Forest is now Wanstead Flats but it formerly extended slightly further south, to the Romford Road . The forest occupies a ridge of higher ground, the Epping Forest Ridge, set between the valleys of the Rivers Lea and Roding . These valleys were formed by arms of the Scandinavian ice sheet during the last glacial period , around 18,000 BC. The ridge consists of boulder clay topped with loam, while towards its southern end it is overlain with glacial gravel . The highest points are near Ambresbury Banks to the south of Epping, which is 111 metres (384 feet) above sea level, while Pole Hill near Chingford reaches 91 metres (299 feet). On the western edge of the ridge, High Beach at a similar height, is an expanse of gravel and Bagshot sand , thought to have been deposited by an unknown river which flowed northwards from the Weald of Kent before the creation of the Thames Valley . The following is a simplified list of the various parts of Epping Forest, starting from the north: Lower Forest ; a triangular expanse of oak and hornbeam wood just north of the town of Epping which separates it from the main body of the forest. Bell Common and Epping Thicks ; the forest area directly to the south of Epping. Bell Common includes a cricket pitch, the M25 motorway passes underneath enclosed in a tunnel. Epping Thicks is the location of Ambresbury Banks Iron Age fort . Genesis Slade ; an area of unpollarded beech, oak and hornbeam on the eastern edge of the forest towards Theydon Bois . Great Monk Wood ; a large area of pollarded beech and hornbeam astride the Epping New Road, reaching the outskirts of Loughton in the east. High Beech ; an open sandy ridge to the west of the forest, with views to Waltham Abbey and across the Lea Valley. Bury Wood and Chingford Plain ; the southwestern part of the main forest extending to Chingford, where the plain includes a golf course. Knighton Wood and Lords Bushes ; an isolated area of forest at Buckhurst Hill , the former being previously landscaped parkland which was added to the forest in 1930. Hatch Forest and Highams Park ; a strip of forest extending south from Chingford along the River Ching . Highams Park Lake was designed by Humphry Repton in 1794 and was added to the forest in 1891. Woodford Green ; an area of grassland lined by trees, including a cricket pitch. Walthamstow Forest and Gilbert's Slade a continuation of the forest southwards from Woodford Green, straddling the North Circular Road and extending towards Whipps Cross . Leyton Flats ; stretch between Snaresbrook , Whipps Cross and the Green Man at Leytonstone . Largely open grassland with the Eagle and Hollow Ponds. Bush Wood and Wanstead Flats ; extend east from Leytonstone towards Forest Gate and Manor Park . Mostly open grassland featuring football pitches and several ponds. Wanstead Park ; an enclosed area of the forest with restricted opening; formerly the landscaped parkland of Wanstead House demolished in 1825, the park was added to the forest in 1880. Ecology and habitats [ edit ] An overgrown Beech pollard , in Epping Forest The age of the forest and the range of habitats it contains make it a valuable area for wildlife, and it is designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest . Its former status a common, with wood-pasture and plains has had a great effect on its ecology. Although the Epping Forest Act almost certainly saved the forest from total destruction, it has to some extent had a deleterious effect on the area's biodiversity . Wood pasture [ edit ] The areas historic land use has had an enormous impact on the areas character and ecology, this is particularly evident with the pollarded trees, which were cut back to the bolling , the permanent base of the pollard, every 13 years or so. The bolling was cut just above the browse line of wild and domestic grazing animals. However, the Forests pollards have not been cut since the passing of the Epping Forest Act, have now grown massive crowns of thick, trunk-like branches with correspondingly large boles . This gives the trees an unusual appearance, uncommon in other forests. Often the weight of the branches cannot be supported by the parent tree, and the large amount of dead wood in the forest supports numerous rare species of fungi and invertebrates . Epping Forest has 55,000 ancient trees , more than any other single site in the United Kingdom. Secondary woodland in Epping Forest Predominant tree species are Pedunculate oak ( Quercus robur ), European beech ( Fagus sylvatica ), European hornbeam ( Carpinus betuloides ), silver birch ( Betula pendula ) and European holly ( Ilex aquifolium ). Indicator species of long-uninterrupted woodland include service-tree ( Sorbus torminalis ) butcher's-broom ( Ruscus aculeatus ) and drooping sedge ( Carex pendula ). The pollarded trees allowed light through to the woodland floor, increasing the numbers of low-growing plants. Since the Act, the vast crowns of the pollards cut out most of the light to the underbrush. Plains [ edit ] The plains were located in wet or low lying areas. The area surrounding the forest is now to a great extent urbanised; the corresponding reduction in grazing has led to some former areas of grassland and heathland being overcome by secondary woodland . Restoration work [ edit ] In recent years, the Conservators have experimented with pollarding in selected areas of the forest, lopping some old pollards back to the bolling (with mixed results) or creating new bollings. A herd of English Longhorn cattle has been reintroduced to graze the heathland and grassland. Lakes and ponds [ edit ] Hollow Pond, a former gravel pit on Leyton Flats near Whipps Cross . Over 100 lakes and ponds can be found within the forest varying in size and age. They all provide important habitats for numerous species of fauna and flora. Many of them are man-made with the majority of them created through gravel extraction. Several were formed as part of a landscape design and a few were the result of Second World War bombs and V-2 rockets . Activities allowed on the waters include angling which is permitted in 24 of the lakes and ponds. A wide range of freshwater fish can be caught. All of the lakes and ponds are accessible to the public and are located on or close to forest paths. Fauna [ edit ] A wide range of animals are found, including fallow deer ( Dama dama ), muntjac ( Muntiacus reevesi ) and European adder ( Vipera berus ). Deer [ edit ] The fallow deer found in Epping Forest are of an unusual black colouration, perhaps descended from some black deer presented by King Christian IV of Denmark to James I in 1612, although there are earlier records of black deer in England before this date. By 1878 when the Epping Forest Act gave the deer firm legal protection, poaching had reduced the herd to twelve does and one buck; however, numbers had recovered to around 200 by the start of the 20th century. In 1954, it was noted that common lighter-brown fallow deer had begun to interbreed in the forest and some black examples were sent to Whipsnade Zoo to preserve this variety. Subsequently, losses to traffic and dogs prompted the establishment of an enclosed deer sanctuary of 109 acres (44 ha) near Debden, to maintain a stock of deer which can be released back into the forest when the population levels become too low. Red deer were once found in Epping Forest, but the last survivors were rounded-up and taken to Windsor Great Park at the end of the 19th century. The last recorded sighting of roe deer in the forest was in 1920. In recent decades, Reeves's muntjac have been reported in the southern part of the forest. The announcement of licensed culling of fallow deer and muntjac in forest "buffer land" in 2016 was criticised by local residents but defended by environmentalists as necessary to prevent over-grazing of woodland undergrowth. Planning designations [ edit ] Most of the forest, an area of 1,728 hectares (4,270 acres) is a Site of Special Scientific Interest The forest is a Special Area of Conservation . Most of the Forest is part of the Metropolitan Green Belt . Much of the Forest is seignated as Metropolitan Open Land . Leisure activities [ edit ] A wide variety of leisure activities associated with the forest, most notably rambling, cycling and horse riding. Mountain biking in Epping Forest. A youth football match on Wanstead Flats . Epping Forest attracts large numbers of mountain bikers . Mountain biking is generally permitted except around the Iron Age camps, Loughton Brook and other ecologically or geomorphologically sensitive areas. Despite clear signposting, a minority of mountain bikers and horse riders continue to cause damage in these areas, and the Conservators of Epping Forest have expressed their concern. A number of clubs organise rides, particularly on Sunday mornings. The forest is also used as a training area for many national level mountain-bike racers as it is highly regarded for its fast and tight flowing single track trails. This type of terrain is known within the mountain bike fraternity as cross country (or XC). Epping Forest was considered as a venue for the mountain-biking event of the 2012 Summer Olympics, though the final choice was near Hadleigh Castle . [ citation needed ] Stage 3 of the 2014 Tour de France passed through the forest from Epping to Buckhurst Hill along the Epping New Road. Horse riding is popular in Epping Forest. Riders need to be registered with the Epping Forest conservators before they are allowed to ride in the forest. Running as a form of recreation in Epping Forest goes back almost to the birth of the sport in the 1870s, including hosting the inaugural English Championships in 1876. Orienteering and rambling are also popular. There are numerous guidebooks offering shorter walks for the casual visitor. The most important event in the ramblers' calendar in the area is the traditional Epping Forest Centenary Walk, an all-day event commemorating the saving of Epping Forest as a public space, which takes place annually on the third Sunday in September. High Beach in Epping Forest was the first British venue for motorcycle speedway and opened on 19 February 1928.  The track was behind The King's Oak public house, and drew large crowds in its early days.  The track was closed when a swimming pool was added to the pub's grounds after the Second World War, though enthusiasts and veterans still gather at the site every year on the nearest Sunday to 19 February. The remains of the track are still visible, in the grounds of the Epping Forest Field Centre behind the King's Oak. The field centre in the forest, run by Field Studies Council provides a variety of courses. There are 60 pitches for football with changing facilities on forest land at Wanstead Flats, which are used by amateur and youth teams. There is a public 18-hole golf course at Chingford Plain, which is also used by the Royal Epping Forest Golf Club, Chingford Golf Club and Chingford Ladies' Golf Club. The course was established in the forest in 1888. Cricket is played on forest land at Woodford Green, Bell Common (Epping), Buckhurst Hill, and High Beach. One historic match is recorded in the forest in 1732 between London Cricket Club and an Essex & Hertfordshire side . The result is unknown. The match is the earliest known reference to both Essex and Hertfordshire as county teams. Visitor centres [ edit ] The forest has three visitor centres: Epping Forest Gateway at Chingford incorporating The View interpretation centre Queen Elizabeth's Hunting Lodge and Butler's Retreat at High Beach The Temple, Wanstead Park Public transport [ edit ] Public transport serves most locations in and around the forest.  The forest is accessible from most London Underground Central Line stations between Leytonstone and Epping and London Overground between Wood Street and Chingford and at the very southern end by TFL Rail at Manor Park . In the 1980s, the name "Forest" was given to one of the districts in which London's buses was divided, covering east London, and including the south part of the forest.  Its logo was a squirrel above the London Transport roundel .  Later, from 1989 until its collapse in 1991, London Forest part of London Buses Limited, was the name of an arms length bus operating unit of London Regional Transport in the area, with an oak tree as its logo. Cultural associations [ edit ] The sculptor Jacob Epstein created a series of paintings of the forest Epping Forest has frequently been the setting for novels, and has attracted poets, artists and musicians for centuries. Many of these artists lived at Loughton . Loughton is also home to the East 15 Acting School and its Corbett Theatre. Fine art [ edit ] Sculptor Jacob Epstein lived on the very edge of the forest for a quarter of a century at Baldwins Hill, Loughton. Epstein in his Autobiography (1955) says that he wanted his sculpture Visitation , now in the Tate Collection , to be sited overlooking the forest. In 1933, he exhibited 100 paintings of the forest, and continued to paint during the war. His gouache , an essay in green tints and textures, Pool – Epping Forest , of Baldwins Hill Pond, was exhibited in 1945. Many of his forest painting are in the Garman Ryan Collection at the New Art Gallery, Walsall Literature [ edit ] Elizabethan poets such as George Gascoigne and Thomas Lodge lived in and around the forest. The writer Lady Mary Wroth lived at Loughton Hall . Ben Jonson , best known for his satirical play The Alchemist , was a frequent visitor to the forest with George Chapman . In Daniel Defoe 's novel A Journal of the Plague Year (1722), a group of Londoners try to escape the plague by settling in and around Epping Forest. In the 18th century, Mary Wollstonecraft , writer, philosopher and feminist , spent the first five years of her life growing up in the forest. In the 19th century, the poet and humorist Thomas Hood published The Epping Hunt in 1829, about the rowdy annual Easter Monday deer hunt for Londoners which started at Buckhurst Hill. In 1832, Hood and his wife moved to the Lake House in Wanstead Park, which was later incorporated into the forest, and his 1838 novel Tylny Hall is set there. Charles Dickens ' novel Barnaby Rudge begins with a description of the forest in 1775. Alfred, Lord Tennyson lived at Beech Hill House, High Beach, from 1837–1840, where he wrote parts of In Memoriam A.H.H. . Suffering from depression, he stayed as a guest at Dr. Martin Allen's asylum, where he would have encountered poet John Clare , whose behaviour became so erratic that he was removed to the asylum in 1837. William Morris , artist, writer and socialist, was born in Walthamstow in 1834, and spent his early years in what was then rural Essex, close to the outlying sections of the forest. Arthur Morrison , "the English Zola ", lived successively at Chingford, Loughton, and High Beach in the forest, and – particularly in To London Town – the forest is used as a contrast to the East London deprivation he wrote about. Horace Newte , his contemporary and friend, lived at Loughton and Theydon Bois . Rudyard Kipling and Stanley Baldwin spent a seminal long holiday as boys in Loughton adjacent to the Forest, which they loved. This has been documented in detail by Janice Lingley in her′′Loughton Idyll′ (Alderton Press 2020). The poet Edward Thomas was posted to a temporary army camp at High Beach when he enlisted in the Artists' Rifles in 1915. Although the conditions in the camp were squalid, Thomas enjoyed the forest and the following year moved with his wife to a cottage at Paul's Nursery, close to High Beach. One of his last poems, Out in the dark , was written at High Beach at Christmas 1916, shortly before he was killed in France. During the 20th century, several writers used the forest as a setting for their novels, including R. Austin Freeman 's Jacob Street Mystery (1940), partly set at Loughton Camp. Dorothy L. Sayers ' 1928 mystery Unnatural Death includes the discovery, in Epping Forest, of the body of a young woman possessing knowledge that could incriminate a murderer.  The horror writer James Herbert used Epping Forest as the setting for his novel Lair (1979). In the book, a horde of Giant Black Rats establish a colony in the forest and embark on a murderous campaign against humans. Herbert mentions a now obscure legend attached to the forest – the legend of the white stag . Supposedly, the sighting of this animal is an omen of trouble and death. Natural historian and author Fred J Speakman lived at the Epping Forest Field Studies Centre, High Beach. He wrote several books about the area, including A Poacher's Tale with Alfred T Curtis, a Waltham Abbey -born poacher , and A Keeper's Tale , describing the life of forest keeper Sidney Butt. T E Lawrence owned an estate at Pole Hill, Chingford ; this was added to the Forest in 1929 and Lawrence's hut re-erected in the Forest Headquarters at the Warren, Loughton, where it remains, largely forgotten, today. Actor and playwright Ken Campbell (1941–2008) lived in Loughton, adjacent to Epping Forest; his funeral took the form of a woodland burial in the forest. Music [ edit ] The song "The White Buck of Epping" by Sydney Carter (1957) refers to a sighting of (and subsequent hunt for) a white buck in the forest. A track on Genesis ' 1973 album Selling England by the Pound is entitled " The Battle of Epping Forest ", and refers to a real-life East End gang-fight. The interior of the gatefold sleeve of the progressive rock band Emerson, Lake & Palmer 's third studio album Trilogy features a photomontage showing multiple images of the band in the forest carpeted with autumn leaves. The Paul McCartney and Wings album London Town includes the song "Famous Groupies" (Paul McCartney) with the lyrics, "There was a lead guitarist / Who lived in Epping Forest / And all he ever wanted was to blow". Damon Albarn 's song " Hollow Ponds " (2014) is based on his memories of locals swimming at Hollow Ponds in Epping Forest in the heat wave of 1976, and other childhood memories of the area. Television [ edit ] The forest featured heavily in an episode of Living TV 's Most Haunted Live over New Year 2003/2004 as the team, made up of Yvette Fielding and Derek Acorah , investigated the forest in the hope of discovering the spirit of Dick Turpin . The team got lost in the forest live on air, and a ranger was required to find them. In the British BBC soap opera screened in February 1999, EastEnders , fictional character Steve Owen ( Martin Kemp ) accidentally killed his stalker Saskia Duncan (Deborah-Sheridin Taylor). He later panicked and buried her body in the forest. It was discovered 10 months later. An episode of the BBC series New Tricks which was set in the forest was broadcast on 3 September 2013. In the episode "Day Trippers" of the Thames Television sitcom Robin's Nest , first broadcast on 27 November 1978, the main characters picnic in the forest. The forest was featured in the BBC programme Countryfile broadcast on 21 June 2020 presented by Anita Rani . Cinema [ edit ] Currently (2013) the forest has been used as a location in fourteen films including the Black Knight sequence in the 1975 film Monty Python and the Holy Grail . Crime [ edit ] Dick Turpin is alleged to have had a hideout in the forest The forest has long standing criminal associations. In the 18th century, Epping Forest became notorious as the haunt of highwaymen , who preyed on the coaches of wealthy racegoers on the road from London to Newmarket . Dick Turpin and Tom King used the forest as a hideaway, and Jack Rann , known as "Sixteen String Jack", had a pub named after him in Theydon Bois . Turpin had a hideout there. The tree cover and the forest's location close to London have made it notorious as a burial area for murder victims. Triple policeman murderer Harry Roberts hid out in the forest for a short time before his arrest in 1966. Murders [ edit ] 1966 – Marian Hartley, a 15-year-old schoolgirl, was killed by Joseph Kiely, 20. Kiely dragged Hartley into the forest late at night, in the Chingford area, where he sexually assaulted her and strangled her, after she had been to a school dance. 1970 – The bodies of Susan Blatchford (eleven years old) and Gary Hanlon (twelve years old) were discovered in a copse on Lippitts Hill, after they went missing from their homes in Enfield , north London, in March 1970. The case was to be known as the 'Babes in the Wood' murders . Thirty years later, Ronald Jebson, already serving a life sentence for the 1974 murder of eight-year-old Rosemary Papper, confessed to the murders. 1981 – The thin decomposed 6 ft body of a white European man aged 30–40 was found in the undergrowth in the forest. He had a money belt containing English and Spanish money and wore a watch, costing approximately £40. The body remains unidentified. 1989 – Terence Gooderham, an accountant, and his girlfriend, Maxine Arnold, were both killed in a hit-man-style slaying whereby they were both shot with a double-barrelled shotgun. Although unsolved, it has been reported in the press that James Moody , described as "Britain's most notorious hitman", may have been responsible for the killings, although he was also murdered a few years later. It has been further suggested in the press that Gooderham was targeted because he creamed off £250,000 in drugs money that he was involved in laundering and that the hit was ordered by the Adams Family criminal organisation, which is also known as the Clerkenwell crime syndicate . 1990 – Patricia Parsons, who ran a massage parlour , was found dead in her car having been shot in the head with a cross-bow. It was suggested that she had a 'black book' of clients and was subject to a contract killing following the possibility that she was going to sell details to a newspaper. The murder remains unsolved. 2000 – Wendy Woodhouse, 31, was taken to forest in Essex, stripped, tortured and beaten to death with a snooker cue by two men who thought she had cheated them in a drugs deal. Courtney Peters, 28, an illegal immigrant from Jamaica , and Ewing Thomas, 25, of Stoke Newington , north London, were jailed for life for her murder at the Old Bailey . 2004 – The remains of Ivor Willis, who had been missing for two years, were found on Wanstead Flats . 2003 – The body of a person aged 40 years or more was found in the forest. Experts could not identify the person's sex as the body was believed to have been there for up to 20 years. The body remains unidentified. 2005 – Shah Afruj Ali, 40, was lured to the forest and stabbed, before his body was burnt by his younger lover Joygun Nessa, 27, and her brother Azhor Khan, 18, in 2005. 2005 – Rafal Czapczyk was found, after passers-by heard gunshots, with ballistic wounds to his head at Wake Arms. He died later in hospital. The body remained unidentified for several months until his family in Poland recognised mortuary pictures that had been released by police. It is not believed that his killers have been found. 2015 – Scotland Yard launched a murder inquiry after the body of Hidir Aksakal was found close to Hollow Ponds, Leytonstone , on 9 September 2015. See also [ edit ] Edward Buxton , who played a part in saving the forest for public use Epping Forest Keepers , responsible for the management and care of the forest Fred J Speakman , naturalist and author List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Greater London List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Essex Metropolitan Police Air Support Unit , is based in the forest at Lippits Hill Stephen Pewsey , historian Verderers of Epping Forest References [ edit ] ^ Brewer's Dictionary of London Phrase and Fable, Russ Willey, Chambers 2009 ^ "Epping Forest" . City of London. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012 . Retrieved 3 January 2015 . ^ Allan C. Fisher Jr. (June 1961). " "The City" - London's Storied Square Mile". National Geographic . 119 (6): 735–778. In addition to its police, who must be strapping six-footers, the City boasts its own magistrates' courts and health and engineering departments. It maintains four spans over the Thames, including historic London Bridge, and large recreational areas outside the City, such as Epping Forest. ^ ELLIS, Peter Berresford 'A Guide to Early Celtic Remains in Britain.' London. Constable. 1991 ^ Baker, Moxey, Oxford 1978. ^ Woodlands, The New Naturalist Library, Oliver Rackham, p416 ^ Woodlands, The New Naturalist Library, Oliver Rackham, p66 ^ The London Encyclopaedia, Weinreb and Hibbert, 1983 ^ British listed buildings – The Warren, Loughton Retrieved 10 September 2012 ^ Addison 1945, p. 110 ^ Ramsey 1986, p. 70 ^ Layton 1985, p. 271 ^ Ramsey 1986, p. 112 ^ Haggar 2012, p. 83 ^ Layton 1985, p. 272 ^ Haggar 2012, pp. 83-84 ^ Woodlands, The New Naturalist Library, Oliver Rackham, p526 ^ Woodlands, The New Naturalist Library, Oliver Rackham, p417 ^ Woodlands, The New Naturalist Library, Oliver Rackham, p417 ^ Haggar 2012, pp. 85-90 ^ Gorman, Mark. "Wanstead Flats History Walks : No. 2 : Aldersbrook Flats" (PDF) . www.leytonhistorysociety.org.uk . Leyton & Leytonstone Historical Society . Retrieved 3 February 2020 . ^ Haggar 2012, p. 90 ^ Walford 1898, p. 429 ^ Haggar 2012, p. 91 ^ Trees and Woodland in the british landscape, Oliver Rackham, 2001, p179 ^ Buxton 1885, p. 25 ^ Haggar 2012, pp. 91-93 ^ Woodlands, The New Naturalist Library, Oliver Rackham, p417 ^ Walford, E (1883). A Narrative of Greater London. Its Places. Its History. Its People . Vol. 2. p. 543. ISBN 0-543-96787-5 . Retrieved 4 December 2008 . ^ "The Warren, Loughton" . Retrieved 20 March 2013 . ^ "Cattle Grazing on Epping Forest" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 15 August 2012 . ^ "Waltham Forest Guardian 28 October 2008" . Guardian-series.co.uk. 28 October 2008. Archived from the original on 1 March 2012 . Retrieved 15 August 2012 . ^ City of London Epping Forest wildlife web page Archived 16 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Epping Forest Bye-Laws 1980 and additional Bye-Laws 1986" (PDF) . Corporation of London. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 June 2011 . Retrieved 21 September 2011 . ^ City of London- Butler's Retreat Retrieved 25 February 2013 ^ Epping Forest Gateway Archived 4 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 19 July 2013 ^ News report Retrieved 18 July 2013 ^ Shown in the (broadly reliable) Chapman and Andre map of Essex, 1777 ^ Hagger 2012, p. 10 ^ "The major ecological trend in the past 100 years has been towards uniformity" (Baker, Moxey, Oxford 1978). ^ Trees and Woodland in the British landscape, Oliver Rackham, Phoenix, Revised 1996 ^ Lascelles, Susanna (4 July 2017). "Ancient trees celebrated at Epping Forest" . cityoflondon.gov.uk . City of London Corporation . Retrieved 6 February 2021 . ^ City of London press release on extension of grazing by cattle Archived 26 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ City of London-Epping Forest Retrieved 21 November 2014 ^ Friends of Epping Forest – The Bomb Crater Retrieved 20 November 2014 ^ Angling information Retrieved 27 November 2013 ^ Chapman 1975, p. 26 ^ a b c Ramsey 1986, p. 71 ^ Chapman 1975, p. 27 ^ Madelin, Thibaud. "Muntjac Deer in the South of Epping Forest with a perspective on population study" (PDF) . Wren Wildlife and Conservation Group Newsletter (Winter 2014): 13–15 . Retrieved 17 January 2021 . ^ Gillett, Francesca (30 November 2016). "Fierce row over 'appalling' plan to hunt deer at east London woodland Epping Forest" . www.standard.co.uk . Evening Standard / ESI Media . Retrieved 17 January 2021 . ^ "Epping Forest SSSI citation" (PDF) . Natural England. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2012 . Retrieved 15 August 2012 . ^ "Map of Epping Forest (SSSI)" . Natural England . Retrieved 14 July 2013 . ^ "Special Areas of Conservation: Epping Forest" . Joint Nature Conservation Committee . Retrieved 14 January 2016 . ^ "Epping Forest: Loughton Camp:: OS grid TQ4197 :: Geograph British Isles – photograph every grid square!" . Geograph.org.uk . Retrieved 15 August 2012 . ^ Comments from the Corp. at eppingtrails.co.uk Archived 3 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Eggboro, David (7 July 2014). "Reaction to the Tour de France in Epping Forest" . East London & West Essex Guardian . Retrieved 13 April 2014 . ^ "Annual Centenary Walk" . Friends of Epping Forest. 18 September 2011 . Retrieved 15 August 2012 . ^ King's Oak speedway Retrieved 6 August 2010 ^ "Epping Forest – Football" . www.cityoflondon.gov.uk . The City of London . Retrieved 24 April 2017 . ^ "Chingford Golf Course" . www.chingfordgolfcourse.co.uk . The City of London . Retrieved 24 April 2017 . ^ "Epping Forest – Other sports" . www.cityoflondon.gov.uk . The City of London . Retrieved 24 April 2017 . ^ G. B. Buckley (1937) Fresh Light on 18th Century Cricket , p. 7. Cotterell. ^ Epping Forest , CricketArchive. Retrieved 24 December 2018. (subscription required) ^ City of London visitor information Retrieved 27 June 2013 ^ "London Transport – Local Bus Maps" . eplates.info. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 August 2013 . ^ a b Epping forest in literature Retrieved 25 April 2008 ^ Mary Wollstonecraft retrieved 25 April 2008 ^ Roberts, Greg (16 June 2014). "Tally Ho! – A Brief History of The Epping Hunt Part 5 – A Fond Farewell" . www.wickedwilliam.com . Resources for study of the life and times of William-Pole-Tylney-Long-Wellesley (1788–1857) . Retrieved 19 November 2017 . ^ Barnaby Rudge Chapter 1 Retrieved 25 April 2008 ^ William Morris gallery Archived 6 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 26 April 2008 ^ Wilson, Jean Moorcroft (2015). Edward Thomas: from Adlestrop to Arras: A Biography . Bloomsbury Continuum. p. 343. ISBN 978-1408187135 . ^ "High Beach and Paul's Nursery" . City of London.gov.uk . Retrieved 12 March 2017 . ^ Wilson 2015, p.363 ^ Wisniewski, Jacek (2009). Edward Thomas: A Mirror of England . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 202. ISBN 978-1443802109 . ^ Epping Forest Field Studies Centre Retrieved 25 April 2008 ^ Speakman F & Curtis A, A Poacher's Tale (1960) ISBN 0-7135-0969-4 George Bell & Sons ^ Speakman, F, A Keeper's Tale (1962) ISBN 0-85115-224-4 George Bell & Sons ^ Ranger, James (18 June 2010), "HISTORY: A look at Lawrence of Arabia in Epping Forest" , Epping Forest Guardian , archived from the original on 20 October 2011 , retrieved 5 June 2011 ^ "A fond farewell in Epping Forest" . Whatsonstage.com Blogs . Archived from the original on 15 September 2008 . Retrieved 26 September 2016 . ^ Sydney Carter discography Retrieved 17 April 2009 ^ Bowler, Dave; Dray, Bryan (1992). Genesis: A Biography . Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd. p. 82 . ISBN 978-0-283-06132-5 . ^ Trilogy Retrieved 31 August 2012 ^ Paul McCartney & Wings – Famous Groupies , retrieved 24 August 2019 ^ Most Haunted Live Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 11 February 2011 ^ East Enders Retrieved 3 April 2012 ^ News report Retrieved 4 September 2013 ^ Robin's Nest Retrieved 29 September 2015 ^ "Anita's Mini Hub" . Countryfile . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ IMDB – Epping Forest Retrieved 1 February 2013 ^ IMDB – Monty Python and the Holy Grail Retrieved 1 February 2013 ^ Cannon, John; Crowcroft, Robert, eds. (1997). The Oxford Companion to British History . Oxford University Press. p. 465. ISBN 978-0-19-967783-2 . ^ Brandon, David (2001). Stand and Deliver!: A History of Highway Robbery . The History Press. p. 194. ISBN 978-0-7524-6820-4 . ^ W Addison, Epping Forest, its Literary and Historical Associations , 1946. ^ Marian Hartley , Gary Jones. ^ "Babes in the Woods murders" . News.bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 5 January 2011 . ^ Appeals renewed for two unidentified bodies found in Epping Forest , Harry Kemble, Ilford Recorder , 29 November 2013. ^ Maxine Arnold And Terry Gooderham – Epping Forest Archived 4 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine , True Crime Library . ^ Moody: The Life and Crimes of Britain's Most Notorious Hitman , by Wensley Clarkson. ^ The hit at the Royal Hotel , Cal McCrystal, August 1993, The Independent . ^ Busted: The fall of Britain's most ruthless gangster , The Independent , 8 February 2007. ^ Clerkenwell crime syndicate ^ Crossbow killing of vice girl: Man held 17 YEARS ON; EXCLUSIVE DNA TESTS LEAD TO BREAKTHROUGH , The Free Library . ^ Patricia Parsons – Epping Forest Archived 2 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine , True Crime Library . ^ The Unsolved Murder of Patricia Parsons , Wolfie Wiseguy. ^ Men murdered woman cheated in drug deal , By Sue Clough, The Telegraph . ^ 'Violent' death over drug duping , 28 August 2001, BBC News . ^ Dead man named , by David Ivor Willis, Watford Observer . ^ Woods where killers dump their victims Archived 12 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine , by Sara Dixon, This is Local London . ^ Killer brother and sister jailed , 13 October 2006, BBC News . ^ Man murdered in forest shooting , 16 July 2005, BBC News . ^ News report Retrieved 15 September 2015 Sources [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Addison, William (1945). Epping Forest: Its Literary and Historical Associations . London: J.M. Dent & Sons. Ltd. Buckley, G. B. (1935). Fresh Light on 18th Century Cricket . Cotterell. Buxton, Edward North (1885). Epping Forest . London: Edward Stanford. Chapman, Donald; Chapman, Norma (1975). Fallow Deer: Their history, distribution and biology . Lavenham, Suffolk: Terence Dalton Limited. ISBN 978-0900963506 . Hagger, Nicholas (2012). A View of Epping Forest . O Books. ISBN 978-1846945878 . Ramsey, Winston G, ed. (1986). Epping Forest then and now: An anthology . Battle of Britain Prints International. ISBN 978-0900913396 . Qvist, Alfred (1971). Epping Forest . Corporation of London. ISBN 978-0852030042 . Walford, Edward (1898). Greater London: a narrative of its history, its people, and its places. Volume I . London: Cassell & Company Limited. Articles [ edit ] Layton, A. B. (1985). "Recreation, Management and Landscape in Epping Forest: c. 1800-1984" (PDF) . Field Studies (6): 269–290 . Retrieved 9 February 2021 . External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Epping Forest . The official Epping Forest pages on the City of London website Epping Forest Heritage Trust Epping Forest SSSI (English Nature) "Archival material relating to Epping Forest" . UK National Archives . "Archival material relating to Corporation of London: Eppring Forest" . UK National Archives . "Archival material relating to Epping Forest Preservation Society" . UK National Archives . Epping Forest by Sir Jacob Epstein at Tate Britain Pictures of Epping Forest on geograph.org.uk v t e Parks and open spaces in London Royal parks Bushy Green Greenwich Hyde Kensington Regent's Richmond St James's Large urban parks Alexandra Arnos Barking Barra Hall Battersea Blackheath Brockwell Burgess Clissold Crystal Palace Dulwich Enfield Town Finsbury Forster Memorial Hampstead Heath Hanworth Holland Mayesbrook Mountsfield Old Deer Parsloes Primrose Hill Pymmes Queen's Park Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park Ravenscourt Ruskin Southwark Valentines Victoria Wandsworth Wanstead Waterlow Park West Ham Wimbledon Country parks Bayhurst Wood Bedfont Lakes Belhus Woods Eastbrookend Fairlop Waters Foots Cray Fryent Hainault Forest Havering High Elms Hornchurch Lee Valley South Norwood Stanmore Stockley Trent Commons Barnes Blackheath Bostall Heath Clapham Ealing East Sheen Eel Brook Eltham Hackney Marshes Hainault Forest Ham Hampstead Heath Hayes Keston Mitcham Monken Hadley Peckham Rye Plumstead Stanmore Streatham Sutton Tooting Tylers Wandsworth Wimbledon and Putney Winn's Woolwich Wormwood Scrubs Village greens Camberwell Crooked Billet Islington Kew Newington Parsons Richmond Shepherd's Bush Turnham Marshes and wetlands Crayford Erith Hackney Hornchurch Ickenham Ingrebourne Leyton Rainham, Wennington, and Aveley Tottenham Walthamstow Woodberry Wetlands WWT London Wetland Centre Woodland Bostall Braeburn Coldfall Copse Dulwich Epping Forest Grangewood Park Highgate Lesnes Abbey Mad Bess Old Park Oxleas Park Petts Queen's Russia Dock Sydenham Hill House gardens Avenue House Belair Park Boston Manor Park Broomfield House Cannizaro Park Chiswick House Danson Park Grovelands Park Grove Park Gunnersbury Park Hall Place Hampton Court Park Hillingdon Court Kenwood House Lamorbey Park Langtons Manor House Gardens Marble Hill Park Morden Hall Park Morden Park Osterley Park Syon House Valence House Museum Walpole Park Entry-fee charging Kew Gardens London Wetland Centre Community gardens Phoenix Garden v t e Parks and open spaces by London borough Barking and Dagenham Barnet Bexley Brent Bromley Camden Croydon Ealing Enfield Greenwich Hackney Hammersmith and Fulham Haringey Harrow Havering Hillingdon Hounslow Islington Kensington and Chelsea Kingston upon Thames Lambeth Lewisham Merton Newham Redbridge Richmond upon Thames Southwark Sutton Tower Hamlets Waltham Forest Wandsworth City of Westminster v t e Epping Forest District Parishes Abbess Beauchamp and Berners Roding Bobbingworth Buckhurst Hill Chigwell Epping Epping Upland Fyfield High Laver and Little Laver High Ongar Lambourne Loughton Magdalen Laver Matching Moreton Nazeing North Weald Bassett Ongar Roydon Sheering Stanford Rivers Stapleford Abbotts Stapleford Tawney Theydon Bois Theydon Garnon Theydon Mount Waltham Abbey Willingale Other notable settlements Abridge Chipping Ongar Clatterford End Colliers Hatch Epping Green Foster Street Greensted Hastingwood Hobbs Cross, Theydon Garnon Hobbs Cross, Matching Housham Tye Marden Ash Matching Green Matching Tye Newman's End Shelley Tawney Common Threshers Bush Thornwood Toot Hill Waltham Abbey Attractions Epping Forest (woodland) Epping Ongar Railway Greensted Church North Weald Airfield Constituencies Epping Forest Brentwood and Ongar v t e London landmarks Buildings and structures Bridges Albert Bridge Barnes Railway Bridge Battersea Bridge Blackfriars Bridge Chelsea Bridge Chiswick Bridge Fulham Railway Bridge Hammersmith Bridge Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges Kew Bridge Lambeth Bridge London Bridge Millennium Bridge Putney Bridge Southwark Bridge Tower Bridge Vauxhall Bridge Wandsworth Bridge Waterloo Bridge Westminster Bridge Entertainment venues Cinemas BFI IMAX Empire, Leicester Square Odeon Luxe Leicester Square Football stadia Wembley Stadium (national stadium) Craven Cottage (Fulham) The Den (Millwall) Emirates Stadium (Arsenal) Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers) London Stadium (West Ham United) Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace) Stamford Bridge (Chelsea) The Valley (Charlton Athletic) Tottenham Hotspur Stadium (Tottenham Hotspur) Other major sports venues All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club The Championship Course (rowing) Crystal Palace National Sports Centre Lord's (cricket) Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park The Oval (cricket) Twickenham Stadium (rugby) Theatres Adelphi Apollo Victoria Coliseum Criterion Dominion Lyceum Old Vic Palladium Royal National Theatre Royal Opera House Shakespeare's Globe Theatre Royal, Drury Lane Theatre Royal Haymarket Vaudeville Other Alexandra Palace Brixton Academy ExCeL Hammersmith Apollo The O2 Arena Royal Albert Hall Royal Festival Hall Wembley Arena Government 10 Downing Street Admiralty Arch Bank of England City Hall (Southwark) City Hall (Newham) County Hall Guildhall Horse Guards Mansion House The National Archives Old Bailey Palace of Westminster Royal Courts of Justice Scotland Yard SIS Building Thames House Museums and galleries British Museum Churchill War Rooms Courtauld Gallery Cutty Sark Golden Hinde Guildhall Art Gallery HMS Belfast Imperial War Museum Madame Tussauds Museum of London National Gallery National Maritime Museum National Portrait Gallery Natural History Museum Royal Academy of Arts Royal Observatory Science Museum Tate Britain Tate Modern Tower of London Victoria and Albert Museum Wallace Collection Young V&A Places of worship All Hallows-by-the-Tower BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Bevis Marks Synagogue Methodist Central Hall Regent's Park Mosque St Clement Danes St Margaret's, Westminster St Martin-in-the-Fields St Mary-le-Bow St Paul's Cathedral Southwark Cathedral Westminster Abbey Westminster Cathedral Retailing Shops Fortnum & Mason Hamleys Harrods Harvey Nichols Hatchards Liberty Peter Jones Selfridges Shopping centres and markets Borough Market Brent Cross Burlington Arcade Camden Market Kensington Arcade Leadenhall Market One New Change Petticoat Lane Market Royal Exchange Westfield London Westfield Stratford City Royal buildings Partly occupied by the royal family Buckingham Palace Clarence House Kensington Palace St James's Palace Unoccupied Banqueting House Hampton Court Palace Kew Palace The Queen's Gallery Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace Skyscrapers One Canada Square One Churchill Place 8 Canada Square 20 Fenchurch Street 30 St Mary Axe 122 Leadenhall Street Broadgate Tower Citigroup Centre Heron Tower The Shard St George Wharf Tower Tower 42 Structures Albert Memorial ArcelorMittal Orbit Big Ben The Cenotaph Cleopatra's Needle Crystal Palace transmitting station London Eye London Wall Marble Arch Monument to the Great Fire of London Nelson's Column Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros") Thames Barrier Wellington Arch Transport City Airport Heathrow Airport Blackfriars station Cannon Street station Charing Cross station Clapham Junction station Euston station Fenchurch Street station King's Cross station Liverpool Street station London Bridge station Paddington station St Pancras station Stratford station Victoria station Waterloo station London Cable Car Victoria Coach Station Other Barbican Estate Battersea Power Station British Library BT Tower Kew Gardens Lambeth Palace Lloyd's building London Zoo Oxo Tower Smithfield Market Somerset House St Bartholomew's Hospital Parks Royal Parks Bushy Park Green Park Greenwich Park Hampton Court Park Hyde Park Kensington Gardens Regent's Park Richmond Park St James's Park Other Battersea Park Burgess Park Clapham Common College Green Epping Forest Finsbury Park Gunnersbury Park Hampstead Heath Holland Park Kew Gardens Mitcham Common Osterley Park Trent Park Victoria Park Wandsworth Common Wimbledon Common Squares and public spaces Covent Garden Horse Guards Parade Leicester Square Parliament Square Piccadilly Circus Sloane Square Trafalgar Square Streets Aldwych Baker Street Bishopsgate Bond Street Carnaby Street Charing Cross Road Cheapside Cornhill Denmark Street Fenchurch Street Fleet Street Haymarket Jermyn Street Kensington High Street King's Road Lombard Street The Mall Oxford Street Park Lane Piccadilly Portobello Road Regent Street Shaftesbury Avenue Sloane Street Strand Tottenham Court Road Victoria Embankment Whitehall v t e English cricket venues (1726–1770) Addington Hills Artillery Ground Barnes Common Barrack Field Blackheath Bourne Paddock Broadhalfpenny Down Bromley Common Caterham Common Charlwood Chelsea Common Chislehurst Common Cow Meadow Datchet Common Dripping Pan Ealing Common Epping Forest Gray's Inn Guildford Bason Horsmonden Ilford Kew Green Laleham Burway Mickleham Down Parsons Green Putney Heath Sanderstead Common Stansted Park Tothill Fields Uxbridge Moor Vine Cricket Ground Walworth Common Westerham Common Woburn Park "Woolpack", Islington v t e Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Greater London Biological Barn Elms Wetland Centre Bentley Priory Brent Reservoir Bushy Park Chingford Reservoirs Crofton Woods Croham Hurst Denham Lock Wood Downe Bank Epping Forest Farthing Downs Frays Farm Meadows Hainault Forest Hampstead Heath Woods Happy Valley Hayes Common High Elms Home Park Ingrebourne Marshes Inner Thames Marshes Kempton Park Reservoirs Keston Common Mid Colne Valley Old Park Wood Oxleas Woodlands Richmond Park Riddlesdown Ruislip Woods Ruxley Gravel Pits Saltbox Hill Syon Park Walthamstow Marshes Walthamstow Reservoirs Wimbledon Common Geological Abbey Wood Elmstead Pit Gilbert's Pit Harefield Pit Harrow Weald Hornchurch Cutting Wansunt Pit v t e Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Essex Biological Abberton Reservoir Ashdon Meadows Basildon Meadows Belcher's and Broadfield Woods Benfleet and Southend Marshes Blackwater Estuary Blake's Wood & Lingwood Common Bovingdon Hall Woods Bullock Wood Canvey Wick Cattawade Marshes Chalkney Wood Colne Estuary The Coppice, Kelvedon Hatch Cornmill Stream and Old River Lea Crouch and Roach Estuaries Curtismill Green Danbury Common Debden Water Dengie Elsenham Woods Epping Forest Foulness Garnetts Wood and Barnston Lays Garrold's Meadow Glemsford Pits Grays Thurrock Chalk Pit Great Wood and Dodd's Grove Hainault Forest Hales and Shadwell Woods Hamford Water Hangman's Wood and Deneholes Hanningfield Reservoir Harlow Woods Hatfield Forest High Wood, Dunmow Hockley Woods Holehaven Creek Holland Haven Marshes Hunsdon Mead Inner Thames Marshes Little Hallingbury Marsh Mill Meadows Mucking Flats and Marshes Norsey Wood Nunn Wood Pitsea Marsh Quendon Wood Riddles Wood Roding Valley Meadows Roman River Sandbeach Meadows Stour and Copperas Woods, Ramsey Stour Estuary Thorndon Park Thrift Wood, Woodham Ferrers Thundersley Great Common Tiptree Heath Turnford and Cheshunt Pits Upper Colne Marshes Vange and Fobbing Marshes Waltham Abbey Weeleyhall Wood West Thurrock Lagoon and Marshes West Wood, Little Sampford Woodham Walter Common Geological Ardleigh Gravel Pit Clacton Cliffs and Foreshore The Cliff, Burnham-on-Crouch Colne Estuary Dengie Globe Pit Goldsands Road Pit Hall's Quarry Harwich Foreshore Holland-on-Sea Cliff Lion Pit Little Oakley Channel Deposit Lofts Farm Pit Maldon Cutting Marks Tey Brickpit The Naze Newney Green Pit Purfleet Chalk Pits Purfleet Road, Aveley River Ter St Osyth Pit Stour Estuary Wivenhoe Gravel Pit Coordinates : 51°40′N 0°03′E ﻿ / ﻿ 51.66°N 0.05°E ﻿ / 51.66; 0.05 
