https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herefordshire_County_Cricket_Club
Herefordshire County Cricket Club
2022-01-10 00:00:00
Herefordshire County Cricket Club Team information Founded 1992 Home ground Various History MCCC wins 1 MCCAT wins 1 FP Trophy wins 0 Official website Herefordshire County Cricket Club Herefordshire County Cricket Club is one of twenty minor county clubs within the domestic cricket structure of England and Wales . It represents the historic county of Herefordshire . The team is currently a member of the Minor Counties Championship Western Division and plays in the MCCA Knockout Trophy . Herefordshire played List A matches occasionally from 1995 until 2004 but is not classified as a List A team per se . Contents 1 Grounds 2 Honours 3 Earliest cricket 4 Origin of club 5 Club history 6 Notable players 7 References 8 External sources 9 Further reading Grounds [ edit ] The club plays matches around the county at Brockhampton CC, Colwall CC, and Eastnor CC.  Matches were also played at Kington CC, Luctonians CC in Kingsland near Leominster , and Dales CC in Leominster in the past. (see List of Herefordshire County Cricket Club grounds ) Honours [ edit ] Minor Counties Championship (0) - ; shared (1) - 2002 MCCA Knockout Trophy (2) - 2000 and 2016 Earliest cricket [ edit ] Cricket probably reached Herefordshire in the 18th century, though possibly earlier.  The earliest reference to cricket in the county is dated 1823. Origin of club [ edit ] A county club was founded in 1836 but no longer exists.  The present county club was formed in 1992, with it joining the Minor Counties Championship in the same year as a replacement for Durham who had been elevated to the County Championship at the end of the previous season. Club history [ edit ] Herefordshire has won the Minor Counties Championship once, sharing the title with Norfolk in 2002. The county only joined the competition in 1992, replacing Durham, who were promoted to first-class status in the same year. Herefordshire has won the MCCA Knockout Trophy twice since its inception in 1983. It won it in 2000 and 2016. Notable players [ edit ] See List of Herefordshire CCC players and Category:Herefordshire cricketers The following Herefordshire born or Herefordshire CCC cricketers made an impact on the first-class game: England players born in Herefordshire: Reg Perks Peter Richardson Dick Richardson Jack Sharp England players who played for Herefordshire CCC Martin McCague After conclusion of first-class career Neal Radford After conclusion of first-class career Chris Woakes Before start of first-class career First-class players Steve Adshead Mohammad Ali Kevin Cooper Ismail Dawood Naved-ul-Hasan Played for Pakistan Harvey Trump Alvin Kallicharan Played for West Indies References [ edit ] ^ "List A events played by Herefordshire" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 3 January 2016 . External sources [ edit ] Herefordshire County Cricket Club website Minor Counties Cricket Association Official Site Further reading [ edit ] Rowland Bowen , Cricket: A History of its Growth and Development , Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970 E W Swanton (editor), Barclays World of Cricket , Guild, 1986 Playfair Cricket Annual – various editions Wisden Cricketers' Almanack – various editions Ken Hook and Frank Bennett , Cricket in Herefordshire in the 20th Century , Logaton Press, 2007 v t e Herefordshire County Cricket Club Players Current squad List A players Category:Herefordshire cricketers Grounds Current grounds Clenchers Mill Lane, Eastnor Previous grounds The Park, Brockhampton Racecourse Ground, Hereford Dales Cricket Club Ground, Leominster Stowe Lane, Colwall The Recreation Ground, Kington Bulmers Sports Ground, Hereford Mortimer Park, Kingsland ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Herefordshire County Cricket Club captains Records Herefordshire List A cricket records v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight 
