https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hertfordshire
Hertfordshire
2022-12-06 00:00:00
County of England Not to be confused with Herefordshire . Ceremonial county in England Hertfordshire Ceremonial county Flag Coat of arms Motto(s) : "Trust and fear not" Coordinates: 51°49′N 0°13′W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.817°N 0.217°W ﻿ / 51.817; -0.217 Coordinates : 51°49′N 0°13′W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.817°N 0.217°W ﻿ / 51.817; -0.217 Sovereign state United Kingdom Constituent country England Region East Established Ancient Time zone UTC±00:00 ( Greenwich Mean Time ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+01:00 ( British Summer Time ) Members of Parliament List of MPs Police Hertfordshire Constabulary Largest town Watford Ceremonial county Lord Lieutenant Robert Voss High Sheriff Sally Denise Burton DL (2022-23) Area 1,643 km 2 (634 sq mi) • Ranked 36th of 48 Population (mid-2019 est.) 1,184,365 • Ranked 13th of 48 Density 721/km 2 (1,870/sq mi) Ethnicity 80.8% White British 1.5% White Irish 0.1% White Gypsy or Irish Traveller 5.1% Other White 0.8% White & Black Caribbean 0.3% White & Black African 0.8% White & Asian 0.6% Other Mixed 2.6% Indian 1.1% Pakistani 0.5% Bangladeshi 0.8% Chinese 1.6% Other Asian 1.8% Black African 0.8% Black Caribbean 0.3% Other Black 0.2% Arab 0.4% Other Non-metropolitan county County council Hertfordshire County Council Executive Conservative Admin HQ Hertford Area 1,643 km 2 (634 sq mi) • Ranked 25th of 26 Population 1,189,519 • Ranked 6th of 26 Density 724/km 2 (1,880/sq mi) ISO 3166-2 GB-HRT ONS code 26 GSS code E10000015 ITL UKH23 Website www .hertfordshire .gov .uk Districts Districts of Hertfordshire Districts North Hertfordshire Stevenage East Hertfordshire Dacorum City of St Albans Welwyn Hatfield Broxbourne Three Rivers Watford Hertsmere Hertfordshire ( / ˈ h ɑːr t f ər d ʃ ɪ ər / ( listen ) or / h ɑːr f ər d ʃ ɪ ər / ; often abbreviated Herts ) is one of the home counties in southern England . It borders Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire to the north, Essex to the east, Greater London to the south, and Buckinghamshire to the west. For government statistical purposes, it forms part of the East of England region. Hertfordshire covers 634.366 square miles (1,643.00 km 2 ). It derives its name – via the name of the county town of Hertford – from a hart (stag) and a ford , as represented on the county's coat of arms and on the flag . Hertfordshire County Council is based in Hertford, once the main market town and the current county town. The largest settlement is Watford . Since 1903 Letchworth has served as the prototype garden city ; Stevenage became the first town to expand under post-war Britain 's New Towns Act of 1946. In 2013 Hertfordshire had a population of about 1,140,700, with Hemel Hempstead , Stevenage , Watford and St Albans (the county's only city ) each having between 50,000 and 100,000 residents. Welwyn Garden City , Hoddesdon and Cheshunt are close behind with around 47,000 residents. Elevations are higher in the north and west, reaching more than 800 feet (240 m) in the Chilterns near Tring . The county centres on the headwaters and upper valleys of the rivers Lea and the Colne ; both flow south, and each is accompanied by a canal. Hertfordshire's undeveloped land is mainly agricultural, with much of it protected by green-belt policies. Services have become the largest sector of the county's economy. Hertfordshire is well served with motorways and railways for access to London, the Midlands and the North . See the List of places in Hertfordshire and also List of settlements in Hertfordshire by population articles for extensive lists of local places and districts. Contents 1 History 2 Geography 2.1 Geology 2.2 Natural resources and environment 2.3 Urban areas 3 Economy 4 Television 5 Sport 5.1 Football 5.2 Rugby 5.2.1 Rugby league 5.2.2 Rugby union 6 Landmarks 6.1 Main footpaths 7 Transport 8 Education 9 Literature 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links History [ edit ] Main article: History of Hertfordshire The county's landmarks span many centuries, ranging from the Six Hills in Stevenage built by local inhabitants during the Roman period, to Leavesden Film Studios . The volume of intact medieval and Tudor buildings surpasses London, in places in well-preserved conservation areas , especially in St Albans , which includes remains of the Roman town of Verulamium . In 913, Hertfordshire was the area assigned to a fortress constructed at Hertford under the rule of Edward the Elder . Hertford is derived from the Anglo-Saxon heort ford, meaning deer crossing (of a watercourse). The name Hertfordshire is first recorded in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle in 1011. Deer feature in many county emblems. Many of the names of the current settlements date back to the Anglo-Saxon period, with many featuring standard placename suffixes attributed to the Anglo-Saxons: "ford", "ton", "den", "bourn", "ley", "stead", "ing", "lett", "wood", and "worth", are represented in this county by Hertford, Royston, Harpenden, Redbourn, Cuffley, Wheathampstead, Tring, Radlett, Borehamwood and Rickmansworth. There is evidence of human life in Hertfordshire from the Mesolithic period . It was first farmed during the Neolithic period and permanent habitation appeared at the beginning of the Bronze Age . This was followed by tribes settling in the area during the Iron Age . Following the Roman conquest of Britain in AD 43 , the aboriginal Catuvellauni quickly submitted and adapted to the Roman life; resulting in the development of several new towns, including Verulamium (St Albans) where in c. 293 the first recorded British martyrdom is traditionally believed to have taken place. Saint Alban , a Romano-British soldier, took the place of a Christian priest and was beheaded on Holywell Hill. His martyr's cross of a yellow saltire on a blue field is reflected in the flag and coat of arms of Hertfordshire as the yellow field to the stag or Hart representing the county. He is the Patron Saint of Hertfordshire. With the departure of the Roman Legions in the early 5th century , the now-unprotected territory was invaded and colonised by the Anglo-Saxons . By the 6th century, the majority of the modern county was part of the East Saxon kingdom. This relatively short-lived kingdom collapsed in the 9th century, ceding the territory of Hertfordshire to the control of the West Anglians of Mercia . The region finally became an English shire in the 10th century, on the merger of the West Saxon and Mercian kingdoms. In the midst of the Norse invasions, Hertfordshire was on the front lines of much of the fighting. King Edward the Elder , in his reconquest of Norse-held lands in what was to become England , established a " burh " or fort in Hertford, which was to curb Norse activities in the area. His father, King Alfred the Great , established the River Lea as a boundary between his kingdom and that of the Norse lord Guthrum , with the north and eastern parts of the county being within the Danelaw . There is little evidence however of Norse placenames within this region, and many of the Anglo-Saxon features remained intact to this day. The county however suffered from renewed Norse raids in the late 10th to early 11th centuries, as armies led by Danish kings Swein Forkbeard and Cnut the Great harried the country as part of their attempts to undermine and overthrow English king Athelred the Unready . A century later, William of Normandy received the surrender of the surviving senior English Lords and Clergy at Berkhamsted , resulting in a new Anglicised title of William the Conqueror , before entering London unopposed and being crowned at Westminster . Hertfordshire was used for some of the new Norman castles at Bishop's Stortford , and at King's Langley , a staging post between London and the royal residence of Berkhamsted . The Domesday Book recorded the county as having nine hundreds . Tring and Danais became one— Dacorum —from Danis Corum or Danish rule harking back to a Viking not Saxon past. The other seven were Braughing , Stevenage , Cashio , Buntingford , Hertford , Hitchin and Odsey . In the later Plantagenet period, St. Albans Abbey was an initial drafting place of what was to become the Magna Carta. And in the later Wars of the Roses, St. Albans was the scene of two major battles between the Lancastrians and the Yorkists. In Tudor times, Hatfield House was often frequented by Queen Elizabeth I. Stuart King James I used the locale for hunting and facilitated the construction of a waterway, the New River , supplying drinking water to London. As London grew, Hertfordshire became conveniently close to the English capital; much of the area was owned by the nobility and aristocracy , this patronage helped to boost the local economy. However, the greatest boost to Hertfordshire came during the Industrial Revolution , after which the population rose dramatically. In 1903, Letchworth became the world's first garden city and Stevenage became the first town to redevelop under the New Towns Act 1946 . The first shooting-down of a zeppelin over Great Britain during WW1 happened in Cuffley. From the 1920s until the late 1980s , the town of Borehamwood was home to one of the major British film studio complexes, including the MGM-British Studios . Many well-known films were made here including the first three Star Wars movies ( IV , V , & VI ). The studios generally used the name of Elstree . American director Stanley Kubrick not only used to shoot in those studios but also lived in the area until his death. Big Brother UK and Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? have been filmed there. EastEnders is filmed at Elstree. Hertfordshire has seen development at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden ; the Harry Potter series was filmed here and the 1995 James Bond film GoldenEye . On 17 October 2000, the Hatfield rail crash killed four people with over 70 injured. The crash exposed the shortcomings of Railtrack , which consequently saw speed restrictions and major track replacement. On 10 May 2002, the fourth of the Potters Bar rail accidents occurred killing seven people; the train was at high speed when it derailed and flipped into the air when one of the carriages slid along the platform where it came to rest. In early December 2005, the 2005 Hemel Hempstead fuel depot explosions occurred at the Hertfordshire Oil Storage Terminal . Geography [ edit ] Hertfordshire is the county immediately north of London and is part of the East of England region, a mainly statistical unit . To the east is Essex , to the west is Buckinghamshire and to the north are Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire . A significant minority of the population across all districts commute to Central London . The county's boundaries were roughly fixed by the Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844 which eliminated exclaves ; amended when, in 1965 under the London Government Act 1963 , East Barnet Urban District and Barnet Urban District were abolished, their area was transferred to form part of the present-day London Borough of Barnet and the Potters Bar Urban District of Middlesex was transferred to Hertfordshire. The highest point in the county is at 244 m (801 ft) ( AOD ) on the Ridgeway long distance national path, on the border of Hastoe near Tring with Drayton Beauchamp , Buckinghamshire. At the 2011 census, among the county's ten districts, East Hertfordshire had the lowest population density (290 people per km 2 ) and Watford the highest (4210 per km 2 ). Compared with neighbouring Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire lacks large towns or cities on the scale of Luton or Milton Keynes , whose populations exceed 200,000, but its overall population (approximately 1 million) is greater than those of the two aforementioned counties. The River Lea near Harpenden runs through Wheathampstead , Welwyn Garden City, Hertford, Ware, and Broxbourne before reaching Cheshunt and ultimately the River Thames. The far west of the county is the most hilly, with the Chiltern Hills surrounding Tring , Berkhamsted and the Ashridge estate. This Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty runs from near Hitchin in the north to Berkshire and Oxfordshire. Many of the county's major settlements are in the central, northern and southern areas, such as Watford, Hemel Hempstead, Kings Langley , Rickmansworth , St. Albans , Harpenden, Radlett , Borehamwood , Potters Bar , Stevenage, Hatfield , Welwyn and Welwyn Garden City, Hitchin, Letchworth and Baldock. These are all small to medium-sized locations, featuring a mix of post-WWII new towns and older/more historical locales. The City of St. Albans is an example of a historical settlement, as its cathedral and abbey date to the Norman period, and there are ruins from the Roman settlement of Verulamium nearby the current city centre. Stevenage is a mix of post-WWII new town planning amidst its prior incarnation as a smaller town. The Old Town in Stevenage represents this historic core and has many shops and buildings reflecting its pre-WWII heritage. Hitchin also has a historic centre, with many Tudor and Stuart era buildings interspersed amongst more contemporary structures. Hertfordshire's eastern regions are predominantly rural and arable, intermixed with villages and small to medium-sized towns. Royston, Buntingford and Bishops Stortford , along with Ware and the county town of Hertford are major settlements in this regard. The physical geography of eastern Hertfordshire is less elevated than the far west, but with lower rising hills and prominent rivers such as the Stort . This river rises in Essex and terminates via a confluence with the Lea near to Ware. 
Apart from the Lea and Stort, the River Colne is the major watercourse in the county's west. This runs near Watford and Radlett, and has a complex system/drainage area running south into both Greater London and Buckinghamshire. An unofficial status, the purple star-shaped flower with yellow stamens, the Pasqueflower is among endemic county flowers . Geology [ edit ] Main article: Geology of Hertfordshire The rocks of Hertfordshire belong to the great shallow syncline known as the London Basin . The beds dip in a south-easterly direction towards the syncline's lowest point roughly under the River Thames . The most important formations are the Cretaceous Chalk , exposed as the high ground in the north and west of the county, forming the Chiltern Hills and the younger Palaeocene , Reading Beds and Eocene , London Clay which occupy the remaining southern part. The eastern half of the county was covered by glaciers during the Ice Age and has a superficial layer of glacial boulder clays . Natural resources and environment [ edit ] Peter de Wint , Cornfields near Tring Station, Hertfordshire , 1847, Princeton University Art Museum Relief map Much of the west – and much more in the east – have richly diverse countryside. These range from beech woods of the Chilterns , clayland buffer zone countryside of Braughing and the Hadhams across to ancient hornbeam coppices west of the upper Lea valley. The county has sweeping panoramas of chalklands near Royston , Baldock , Hexton and Tring . Large parts of the county are used for agriculture. Some quarrying of sand and gravel occurs around St Albans. In the past, clay has supplied local brick-making and still does in Bovingdon , just south-west of Hemel Hempstead. The chalk that is the bedrock of much of the county provides an aquifer that feeds streams and is also exploited to provide water supplies for much of the county and beyond. Chalk has also been used as a building material and, once fired, the resultant lime was spread on agricultural land to improve fertility. The mining of chalk since the early 18th century has left unrecorded underground galleries that occasionally collapse unexpectedly and endanger buildings. Fresh water is supplied to London from Ware , using the New River built by Hugh Myddleton and opened in 1613. Local rivers, although small, supported developing industries such as paper production at Nash Mills . Hertfordshire affords habitat for a variety of flora and fauna. A bird once common in the shire is the Hooded Crow , the old name of which is the eponymous name of the regional newspaper, the Royston Crow published in Royston . A product, now largely defunct, was watercress , based in Hemel Hempstead and Berkhamsted supported by reliable, clean chalk rivers. Urban areas [ edit ] See also: List of places in Hertfordshire , List of settlements in Hertfordshire by population , and List of lost settlements in Hertfordshire Baldock Berkhamsted Bishop's Stortford Borehamwood Broxbourne Buntingford Bushey Cheshunt Harpenden Hatfield Hemel Hempstead Hertford Hitchin Hoddesdon Letchworth Potters Bar Rickmansworth Royston Sawbridgeworth Stevenage St Albans Tring Waltham Cross Ware Watford Welwyn Garden City Barnet Enfield Harlow Amersham High Wycombe Luton Stanmore class=notpageimage| Main towns in Hertfordshire and environs Economy [ edit ] View of one of the buildings at Hatfield Business Park , currently the headquarters of EE This is a table of trends of regional gross value added of Hertfordshire at current basic prices with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling. Year Regional Gross Value Added Agriculture Industry Services 1995 11,742 96 3,292 8,354 2000 18,370 77 4,138 14,155 2003 20,937 82 4,348 16,507 Hertfordshire has the main operational and/or headquarters UK site of some very large employers. Clockwise from north: In Stevenage (a subsidiary of: BAE Systems , Airbus and Finmeccanica ) MBDA , develops missiles . In the same town, Airbus (Defence & Space Division) produces satellites. Hatfield was where de Havilland developed the first commercial jet liner, the Comet . Now the site is a business park and new campus for the University of Hertfordshire . This major employment site notably hosts EE , Computacenter and Ocado groceries and other goods e-commerce. Welwyn Garden City hosts Tesco 's UK base, hosts the UK Cereal Partners factory and in pharmaceuticals it hosts Roche UK's headquarters (subsidiary of the Swiss Hoffman-La Roche ). GlaxoSmithKline has plants in Ware and Stevenage . Hemel Hempstead has large premises of Dixons Carphone . The National Pharmacy Association (NPA), the trade association for UK pharmacies, is based in St Albans . Kings Langley has the plant-office of Pure , making DAB digital radios . Watford hosts national companies such as J D Wetherspoon , Camelot Group , Bathstore , and Caversham Finance (BrightHouse). It is also the UK base of multi-nationals Hilton Worldwide , TotalEnergies , TK Maxx , Costco , JJ Kavanagh and Sons , Vinci and Beko . The 2006 World Golf Championship and the 2013 Bilderberg Conference , took place at The Grove hotel . Warner Bros. owns and runs its main UK base since the 2000s, Warner Studios, in Leavesden, Watford. Rickmansworth hosts Skanska . Television [ edit ] Local news is provided by BBC London & ITV London , however northern parts of the county receive BBC East & ITV Anglia from Cambridge . Sport [ edit ] In 2012, the canoe and kayak slalom events of the 2012 Summer Olympics took place in Waltham Cross , Broxbourne . Football [ edit ] Vicarage Road stadium in Watford As of the 2021–22 season, there are four professional football teams in Hertfordshire: Watford F.C. , Stevenage F.C. , Arsenal W.F.C. and Boreham Wood F.C. Since 1922, Watford play their home games at Vicarage Road . The club joined the Football League in 1920 as a founding member of the Third Division and first played in the First Division of English football in 1982 , finishing as runners-up to champions Liverpool . Watford was promoted to the Premier League at the end of the 2020–2021 season. After spending one season in the Premier League, they were relegated to the Championship again for the 2022-2023 season. Stevenage F.C. was formed in 1976 as Stevenage Borough and have played at Broadhall Way since 1980. Stevenage was the first club to win a competitive match at the new Wembley Stadium , beating Kidderminster Harriers 3–2 in the 2007 FA Trophy Final . The club currently play in the EFL League Two and have been managed by former player Alex Revell since February 2020. Arsenal F.C. , whilst based at the Emirates Stadium in the London Borough of Islington , has long held a training ground in the county. Until 1999, it held the London Colney University of London facility, until it built a new purpose-built compound adjacent to it. Watford FC currently utilises the old Arsenal training area as its training facility. Arsenal W.F.C. play at Meadow Park in Borehamwood . The club was formed in 1987 and have played in the FA Women's Super League since its inaugural season in 2011 . Hertfordshire has many semi-professional and amateur clubs. The highest placed are Hemel Hempstead Town and St Albans City , who play one division lower in the National League South . Rugby [ edit ] Rugby league [ edit ] Hemel Stags are a rugby league team based in Hemel Hempstead . Hemel Stags have played at Pennine Way Stadium since the club's founding in 1981. Until 2018, the club played in league 1 , the third tier of the British rugby league system, and now compete in the Conference League South . Rugby union [ edit ] The Hertfordshire Rugby Football Union is the governing body for rugby union in Hertfordshire and is responsible for any interested parties involved in rugby. Tring Rugby play matches at Cow Lane, Tring. The first XV currently play in the Regional 1 South East , League. A level 5 league. Landmarks [ edit ] Cedars Park St Albans Abbey University of Hertfordshire Bluebells in Dockey Wood The Warner Bros. Making of Harry Potter Studio Tour at Leavesden Below is a list of notable visitor attractions in Hertfordshire: Aldenham Country Park Ashridge – the estate surrounding the neo-Gothic house by James Wyatt (not open to the public) is National Trust land. Bridgewater Monument , built in 1832 in memory of Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater. 108 feet (33 m) tall and open to the public to ascend to the top Berkhamsted Castle Cedars Park, Broxbourne – historic park once the site of James I's favourite residence, Theobalds Palace. Maintained by Broxbourne Services and the Friends of Cedars Park. de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre , between London Colney and South Mimms Frogmore Paper Mill , Apsley Hatfield Hatfield House – Jacobean house, gardens and park Mill Green Watermill in Hatfield Henry Moore Foundation , Much Hadham – sculpture park on the work of Henry Moore Knebworth House , 250 acres (1.0 km 2 ) of country park, venue of many rock and pop festivals Leavesden Film Studios , home of the Warner Bros. Making of Harry Potter studio tour Letchworth Garden City – the world's first Garden City . Site of the first planned Green Belt , the UK's first roundabout , and a number of experiments in early town planning and house and factory design Spirella Building Magic Roundabout (Hemel Hempstead) – a complex road junction Royston Cave – in Royston town centre Rye House Gatehouse in Hoddesdon (part of the Rye House Plot to assassinate King Charles II ) St Albans Beech Bottom Dyke – large-scale Iron Age defensive or boundary ditch Sopwell Nunnery St Albans Cathedral Verulamium – Roman town remains, including museum of Roman life and the remains of a Roman amphitheatre Scott's Grotto , Ware Shaw's Corner , Ayot St Lawrence – home of George Bernard Shaw Stevenage – the first UK New Town Six Hills Roman barrows site Therfield Heath – a local nature reserve in the north of the county University of Hertfordshire – a public research university based in Hatfield Welwyn Roman Baths Welwyn Viaduct to the north of Welwyn Garden City Walter Rothschild Zoological Museum , Tring – a museum-annotated collection of dead mammals, birds, reptiles and insects Watford Museum , fine art and local artefacts Main footpaths [ edit ] The Ridgeway Icknield Way Grand Union Canal Walk Harcamlow Way Hertfordshire Way Hertfordshire Chain Walk Transport [ edit ] Junction of the M1 and M25 near Hemel Hempstead Govia Thameslink Railway provide frequent train services through Hertfordshire on the Midland Main Line and East Coast Main Line Bridge 168 on the Grand Union Canal Hertfordshire is a home county with many towns forming part of the London commuter belt and has some of the principal roads in England including the A1 , A1(M) , A41 , A414 , M1 , M11 , and the M25 . Four principal national railway lines pass through the county: the West Coast Main Line from Euston . Avanti West Coast operates high speed intercity services via Watford Junction to the Midlands , North Wales , the North West England and Scotland . West Midlands Trains provides local commuter and regional services. the East Coast Main Line from London King's Cross . Local commuter and regional services are provided by Govia Thameslink Railway . London North Eastern Railway runs high speed intercity services via Stevenage to the east coast of Northern England and Scotland the Midland Main Line which forms part of the Thameslink route between Bedford and Brighton via Central London with services are provided by Govia Thameslink Railway . East Midlands Railway provide intercity services along the line from London St Pancras to the East Midlands and Yorkshire the West Anglia Main Line from London Liverpool Street . Local commuter and regional services are provided by Greater Anglia mainly in the east of the county A number of other local rail routes also cross Hertfordshire: the London to Aylesbury Line from London Marylebone runs via Rickmansworth and Chorleywood the Abbey Line , a local line from Watford to St Albans Abbey the Cambridge Line , a branch of the East Coast line which runs via Royston and Letchworth to Cambridge Three commuter lines operated by Transport for London enter the county: the Lea Valley Lines , a suburban metro line from Liverpool Street to Cheshunt via Seven Sisters the Watford DC Line , a suburban metro line from Euston to Watford Junction five stations on the London Underground Metropolitan line Stansted Airport and Luton Airport are both within 10 miles (16 km) of the county's borders. The commercial airfield at Elstree is for light aircraft. The Grand Union Canal passes through Rickmansworth , Watford , Hemel Hempstead , Berkhamsted and Tring . Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hertfordshire . Education [ edit ] St George's School See also: List of schools in Hertfordshire Hertfordshire has 26 independent schools and 73 state secondary schools.
The state secondary schools are entirely comprehensive , although 7 schools in the south and southwest of the county are partially selective (see Education in Watford ).
All state schools have sixth forms , and there are no sixth form colleges .
The tertiary colleges, each with multiple campuses, are Hertford Regional College , North Hertfordshire College , Oaklands College and West Herts College .
The University of Hertfordshire is a modern university based largely in Hatfield . It has more than 23,000 students. Literature [ edit ] Hertfordshire is the location of Jack Worthing 's country house in Oscar Wilde 's play The Importance of Being Earnest . Jane Austen 's novel Pride and Prejudice is primarily set in Hertfordshire. The location of Mr Jarndyce's Bleak House in Charles Dickens 's Bleak House is near St Albans. The eponymous residence in E. M. Forster 's novel Howards End was based on Rooks Nest House just outside Stevenage . George Orwell based Animal Farm on Wallington, Hertfordshire , where he lived between 1936 and 1940. Manor Farm and The Great Barn both feature in the novel. See also [ edit ] England portal Lord Lieutenant of Hertfordshire High Sheriff of Hertfordshire Custos Rotulorum of Hertfordshire – Keeper of the Rolls Hertfordshire (UK Parliament constituency) – Historical list of MPs for Hertfordshire constituency List of Jewish communities in Hertfordshire Hertfordshire GAA The Hundred Parishes Notes [ edit ] ^ Components may not sum to totals due to rounding ^ includes hunting and forestry ^ includes energy and construction ^ includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured References [ edit ] ^ "No. 63644" . The London Gazette . 17 March 2022. p. 5082. ^ "Resident Population" . Hertfordshire Local Information System. Archived from the original on 15 July 2015 . Retrieved 10 February 2015 . ^ "Area Measurements" . Hertfordshire Local Information System. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015 . Retrieved 10 February 2015 . ^ "Zeppelin Raids - Herts at War" . hertsatwar.co.uk . Archived from the original on 28 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 January 2017 . ^ "Leavesden Studios" . Film London . Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 . ^ "Hatfield train crash remembered" . BBC News . 17 October 2010. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ Lewis, Katy (11 December 2015). "I thought a plane had landed on us" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ Staff and agencies (11 December 2005). "Fuel depot blaze 'will last for days' " . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Buncefield blast companies sentenced to pay £9m" . The Independent . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "The East of England" . East of England Local Government Association . Archived from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 23 January 2012 . ^ Bathurst, David (2012). Walking the county high points of England . Chichester: Summersdale. pp. 105–110. ISBN 978-1-84-953239-6 . ^ "Wild Plants: Pasqueflower" Archived 26 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Plantlife . Retrieved 26 February 2015 ^ a b c Hertfordshire A Landscape History Anne Rowe, Tom Williamson (2013), University of Hertfordshire Press at Introduction, e-page 18 https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Hertfordshire/rBleCUlsT_oC?hl=en&gbpv=1&pg=PT18 ^ "About the chalk mines" . Dacorum Borough Council. 2008. Archived from the original on 12 December 2008 . Retrieved 7 February 2009 . ^ "Sir Hugh Myddleton New River" . Intriguing History . 25 April 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2018 . ^ "Parishes: Hemel Hempstead". A History of the County of Hertford . Originally published by Victoria County History, London. Vol. 2. British History Online. 1908. ^ Regional Gross Value Added Archived 1 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Office for National Statistics , pp. 240–253. ^ Charlie Skelton (2 June 2013). "The week ahead: Bilderberg 2013 comes to ... the Grove hotel, Watford" . The Guardian . ^ "Vicarage Road - Watford - The Stadium Guide" . stadiumguide.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ a b "Watford Football Club archive 1881-2017" . watfordfcarchive.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Watford relegated from the Premier League after failing to beat Crystal Palace" . The Mirror . 7 May 2022 . Retrieved 15 July 2022 . ^ "The Lamex Stadium - Stevenage Football Club" . stevenagefc.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Kidderminster 2-3 Stevenage" . 12 May 2007. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Managerial change" . Stevenage F.C . 16 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2021 . ^ "Meadow Park, home to Boreham Wood, Arsenal Ladies" . footballgroundmap.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ Conn, David (7 April 2011). "Women's Super League aims to step out of men's shadow | David Conn" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Hertfordshire Rugby League Clubs" . rugbyclubs.info . Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 August 2018 . ^ "Find Us - Hemel Stags - Rugby League Team" . Hemel Stags . Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 August 2018 . ^ "World famous Bradford Bulls are on their way to Pennine Way this Sunday" . Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 August 2018 . ^ "National League Division One Table - Rugby Union" . BBC Sport . Archived from the original on 2 September 2018 . Retrieved 3 August 2018 . ^ "Hertfordshire Rugby Football Union - News - Fullerians RFC" . fullerians.co.uk . Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 August 2018 . ^ Caminsky, Spencer. "Area Guide: Scenery, culture and a manageable commute, Tring has it all" . Herts Advertiser . Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 August 2018 . ^ "London & SE Division" . Rugby Football Union. Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 . ^ "Pride and Prejudice - the Hertford connection" . Our Hertford and Ware . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Charles Dickens" . Herts Memories . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ Forster, E. M. (Edward Morgan) (1 November 2001). "Howards End" – via Project Gutenberg. ^ "At the gates of Animal Farm" . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "Over the road from Animal Farm" . The Independent . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ "All villages are equal" . The Guardian . 24 May 1999. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . External links [ edit ] Hertfordshire at Curlie Hertfordshire County Council website Neighbouring counties Bedfordshire Bedfordshire , Cambridgeshire Cambridgeshire Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Hertfordshire Essex Buckinghamshire Greater London Essex v t e Ceremonial county of Hertfordshire Boroughs or districts Broxbourne Dacorum East Hertfordshire Hertsmere North Hertfordshire City of St Albans Stevenage Three Rivers Watford Welwyn Hatfield Major settlements Baldock Berkhamsted Bishop's Stortford Borehamwood Broxbourne Buntingford Bushey Cheshunt Chorleywood Harpenden Hatfield Hemel Hempstead Hertford Hitchin Hoddesdon Letchworth Potters Bar Rickmansworth Royston Sawbridgeworth St Albans Stevenage Tring Waltham Cross Ware Watford Welwyn Garden City See also: List of civil parishes in Hertfordshire Topics Hertfordshire County Council Elections Flag Parliamentary constituencies European Parliament constituency Boundary changes Places Settlements by population Lost settlements SSSIs Grade I listed buildings Grade II* listed buildings History Lord Lieutenants High Sheriffs Schools Museums Windmills King George V Playing Fields v t e 1974–1996 ← Ceremonial counties of England → current Bedfordshire Berkshire Bristol Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cheshire Cornwall Cumbria Derbyshire Devon Dorset Durham East Riding of Yorkshire East Sussex Essex Gloucestershire Greater London Greater Manchester Hampshire Herefordshire Hertfordshire Isle of Wight Kent Lancashire Leicestershire Lincolnshire City of London Merseyside Norfolk Northamptonshire Northumberland North Yorkshire Nottinghamshire Oxfordshire Rutland Shropshire Somerset South Yorkshire Staffordshire Suffolk Surrey Tyne and Wear Warwickshire West Midlands West Sussex West Yorkshire Wiltshire Worcestershire v t e London commuter belt Home counties Berkshire Buckinghamshire Essex Hertfordshire Kent Surrey Sussex Urban areas Greater London Built-up Area Farnborough/Aldershot Built-up Area High Wycombe Urban Area Luton/Dunstable Urban Area Medway Towns Urban Area Reading/Wokingham Urban Area Southend Urban Area Cities and towns (100k+) Chelmsford Crawley Guildford High Wycombe London Luton Maidstone Reading Slough Southend-on-Sea Towns (25k–99k) Aldershot Ashford, Surrey Aylesbury Basildon Basingstoke Billericay Bishop's Stortford Borehamwood Bracknell Brentwood Burgess Hill Camberley Canvey Island Chatham Cheshunt Dartford Dunstable Epsom Ewell Earley Farnborough Farnham Fleet Gillingham Gravesend Grays Harlow Harpenden Hatfield Hemel Hempstead Horsham Hitchin Leighton Buzzard Letchworth Loughton Maidenhead Rayleigh Redhill Rochester Royal Tunbridge Wells Sittingbourne St Albans Stevenage Strood Sunbury-on-Thames Tonbridge Ware Watford Welwyn Garden City Wickford Windsor Woking Wokingham Woodley Towns (10k–25k) Addlestone Amersham Ashtead Baldock Beaconsfield Berkhamsted Broxbourne Buckhurst Hill Bushey Chertsey Chesham Chigwell Corringham Croxley Green Dorking East Grinstead East Malling Englefield Green Epping Frimley Frogmore Godalming Hadleigh Haywards Heath Hertford Hoddesdon Horley Houghton Regis Knaphill Leatherhead Marlow Potters Bar Reigate Rickmansworth Rochford Sandhurst Sevenoaks Snodland Shepperton South Benfleet Southborough, Kent Staines-upon-Thames Stanford-le-Hope Stanwell Swanley Thundersley Tilbury Tring Waltham Abbey Waltham Cross Woodford Green Yateley v t e Local authorities in Hertfordshire County council Hertfordshire District councils Broxbourne Dacorum East Hertfordshire Hertsmere North Hertfordshire St Albans Stevenage Three Rivers Watford Welwyn Hatfield v t e Civil parishes in Hertfordshire Dacorum (partly parished) Parishes Aldbury Berkhamsted Bovingdon Chipperfield Flamstead Flaunden Great Gaddesden Kings Langley Little Gaddesden Markyate Nash Mills Nettleden with Potten End Northchurch Tring Tring Rural Wigginton Unparished area Hemel Hempstead East Hertfordshire (wholly parished) Albury Anstey Ardeley Aspenden Aston Bayford Bengeo Rural Benington Bishop's Stortford Bramfield Braughing Brent Pelham Brickendon Liberty Buckland Buntingford Cottered Datchworth Eastwick Gilston Furneux Pelham Great Amwell Great Munden Hertford Hertford Heath Hertingfordbury High Wych Hormead Hunsdon Little Berkhamsted Little Hadham Little Munden Meesden Much Hadham Sacombe Sawbridgeworth Standon Stanstead Abbots Stanstead St Margarets Stapleford Stocking Pelham Tewin Thorley Thundridge Walkern Ware Wareside Watton-at-Stone Westmill Widford Wyddial Hertsmere (partly parished) Parishes Aldenham Elstree and Borehamwood Ridge Shenley South Mimms Unparished areas Bushey Potters Bar North Hertfordshire (partly parished) Parishes Ashwell Barkway Barley Bygrave Caldecote Clothall Codicote Graveley Great Ashby Hexton Hinxworth Holwell Ickleford Kelshall Kimpton King's Walden Knebworth Langley Lilley Newnham Nuthampstead Offley Pirton Preston Radwell Reed Royston Rushden Sandon St Ippolyts St Paul's Walden Therfield Wallington Weston Wymondley Unparished areas Baldock Hitchin Letchworth St Albans (partly parished) Parishes Colney Heath Harpenden Harpenden Rural London Colney Redbourn Sandridge St Michael St Stephen Wheathampstead Unparished area St Albans Three Rivers (partly parished) Parishes Abbots Langley Batchworth Chorleywood Croxley Green Sarratt Watford Rural Unparished areas Rickmansworth (parts not within Batchworth or Croxley Green parishes) Welwyn Hatfield (partly parished) Parishes Ayot St Lawrence Ayot St Peter Essendon Hatfield North Mymms Northaw and Cuffley Welwyn Woolmer Green Unparished area Welwyn Garden City Wholly unparished boroughs Broxbourne (containing Cheshunt and Hoddesdon ) Stevenage Watford See also List of places in Hertfordshire v t e Listed buildings in Hertfordshire Grade I Broxbourne Eleanor Cross Wormleybury Dacorum 130–136 Piccotts End Ashridge Business School Beechwood Park Berkhamsted School Old Building St Mary's Church, Hemel Hempstead East Hertfordshire Aston Bury Manor Balls Park Benington Castle (remains) Hertford Castle Gatehouse Hunsdon House Rye House Gatehouse Scott's Grotto Shire Hall, Hertford St James' Church, Stanstead Abbotts St Leonard's Church, Bengeo St Mary's Church, Ware St Mary the Virgin's Church, Little Hormead Waytemore Castle (remains) Woodhall Park (Heath Mount School) Hertsmere Tyttenhanger House North Hertfordshire Hitchin Priory Holy Trinity Church, Weston St John the Baptist's Church, Royston St Katharine's Church, Ickleford St Mary's Church, Ashwell St Mary's Church, Baldock St Mary's Church, Hitchin St Mary and St Thomas's Church, Knebworth Royston Cave St Albans Clock Tower Old Gorhambury House (remains) Rothamsted Manor St Albans Cathedral St Helen's Church, Wheathampstead St Mary's Church, Redbourn St Michael's Church, St Albans Verulamium Stevenage Rooks Nest House St Nicholas' Church Three Rivers Moor Park Watford Holy Rood Church, Watford St Mary's Church, Watford Welwyn Hatfield Brocket Hall Hatfield House/Old Palace New St Lawrence Church, Ayot St Lawrence Grade II* Broxbourne Rawdon House Theobalds House Dacorum 173 High Street, Berkhamsted Ashlyns Hall Bridgewater Monument The Bury, Hemel Hempstead Cell Park Dean Incent's House Gaddesden Place Golden Parsonage The Old Bell, Hemel Hempstead St Peter's Church, Great Berkhamstead Tring Park Mansion East Hertfordshire All Nations Christian College All Saints' Church, Hertford Almshouses, Buntingford Bayfordbury Chapel at St Edmund's College, Ware County Hall Cromer Windmill Fanhams Hall Goldings Haileybury and Imperial Service College Hare Street House Hanbury Manor Marden Hill House Much Hadham Palace Pishiobury Park Mansion St Andrew's Church, Buckland Stansted Hall Yeomanry House, Hertford Youngsbury Stable Block Hertsmere Aldenham House Dyrham Park lodges and arched gateway Hilfield Castle Knightsland Farm House Lululaund Salisbury Hall Wrotham Park North Hertfordshire All Saints Church, Radwell All Saints Church, Willian The Cloisters, Letchworth St Nicholas' Church, Hinxworth Hinxworth Place Homewood, Knebworth Knebworth House Princess Helena College Spirella Building St Margaret of Antioch's Church, Bygrave St Martin's Church, Knebworth St Mary Magdalene's Church, Caldecote St Paul's Walden Bury St Vincent's Church, Newnham St Albans All Saints Pastoral Centre St Albans Town Hall New Gorhambury House Redbournbury Mill St Leonard's Church, Sandridge St Nicholas Church, Harpenden St Peter's Church, St Albans St Stephen's Church, St Albans Westwick Cottage Three Rivers Hunton Park Langleybury Oxhey Chapel Redheath Watford The Grove The Mrs Elizabeth Fuller Free School building Welwyn Hatfield Ayot House Digswell Viaduct Mill Green Museum and Mill Old St Lawrence Church, Ayot St Lawrence Shaw's Corner Templewood Primary School Other boroughs Stevenage Grade II Broxbourne Broxbourne railway station Cheshunt Great House (remains) Dacorum Ashlyns School Berkhamsted Town Hall Goldfield Mill The Green Dragon, Flaunden Inns of Court War Memorial The Mansion, Berkhamsted Old Town Hall, Hemel Hempstead Pendley Manor Rex Cinema Rossway Shendish Manor Stocks House St John's Church, Boxmoor Tring Market House East Hertfordshire All Saints' Church, Hockerill Benson Memorial Church Brent Pelham Windmill Buntingford Manor House Button Snap Christ Church, Ware Hertford Museum Tooke House Hopper's Hall The Horns, Bull's Green Little Munden Primary School Panshanger orangery, conservatory and stables Red House, Buntingford Rowneybury Cottage St John's Church, Letty Green The Tilbury, Datchworth The White Horse, Burnham Green The White Horse, Hertford Hertsmere Bhaktivedanta Manor The Chequers, Potters Bar Duke of York, Potters Bar Dyrham Park Country Club The Green Man, Potters Bar Ladbrooke School The Lion, Potters Bar Oakmere House Potters Bar War Memorial Shenley Hall Shenley Lodge Wall Hall The White Hart, South Mimms The White Horse, Potters Bar Wyllyotts Manor North Hertfordshire Ashwell Bury Ashwell War Memorial Breachwood Green Mill British Schools Museum Hitchin Town Hall Howgills Lannock Mill, Weston Letchworth Garden City railway station Letchworth Town Hall Lytton Mausoleum Minsden Chapel Putteridge Bury St George's Church, Letchworth St Nicholas' Church, Norton St Mary's Church, Letchworth Stagenhoe St Albans The Blue Anchor The Boot Childwickbury Manor The Cock Colney Heath Mill Fleur de Lys Hare and Hounds The Lower Red Lion The Old Kings Arms Ye Olde Fighting Cocks The Queen's Head, Sandridge Rose and Crown The Six Bells St Albans School Sopwell House Sopwell Nunnery (ruins) Verulam House The White Lion Stevenage Barclay Academy The Thomas Alleyne Academy Trigg's Barn/37 High Street, Stevenage Three Rivers Croxley Green Windmill Watford High Elms Manor The Old Station House St John's Church, Watford Watford Grammar School for Boys Watford Palace Theatre Watford Town Hall Welwyn Hatfield The Beehive, Welwyn Garden City The Brocket Arms Digswell House The Eight Bells, Hatfield Hope and Anchor, Welham Green The Horse and Groom, Hatfield The Green Man, Hatfield The Red Lion, Hatfield Statue of Robert Gascoyne-Cecil Tolmers Park The Wrestlers, Hatfield v t e Pubs in Hertfordshire Dacorum Green Dragon, Flaunden East Hertfordshire The Horns, Bull's Green The Tilbury, Datchworth White Horse, Burnham Green White Horse, Hertford Hertsmere Black Horse, South Mimms Chequers, Potters Bar Duke of York, Ganwick Corner Green Man, Potters Bar The Lion, Potters Bar Oakmere House, Potters Bar White Hart, South Mimms White Horse, Potters Bar Wyllyotts Manor, Potters Bar St Albans Blue Anchor The Boot The Cock Fleur de Lys Hare and Hounds Lower Red Lion Old Kings Arms The Peahen Queens Head Rose and Crown Six Bells White Lion Ye Olde Fighting Cocks Welwyn Hatfield The Beehive, Welwyn Garden City Brocket Arms, Ayot St Lawrence Eight Bells, Hatfield Horse and Groom, Hatfield Hope and Anchor, Welham Green Green Man, Hatfield Red Lion, Hatfield The Wrestlers, Hatfield Category v t e Rivers and watercourses of Hertfordshire Ash Bayford Brook Beane Bulbourne Chess Colne Cuffley Brook Gade Hiz Ivel Lea River Lee Flood Relief Channel Lee Navigation Mimram New River Oughton Pix Brook Quin Rhee or Cam Rib Stort Stort Navigation Small River Lea Ver v t e Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Hertfordshire Biological Aldbury Nowers Alpine Meadow Amwell Quarry Ashridge Commons and Woods Ashwell Springs Benington High Wood Blagrove Common Bricket Wood Common Croxley Common Moor Frogmore Meadows Great Hormead Park Hertford Heath Hunsdon Mead Knebworth Woods Moor Hall Meadows Northaw Great Wood Oddy Hill and Tring Park Patmore Heath Plashes Wood Redwell Wood Roughdown Common Rye Meads Sarratt Bottom Sawbridgeworth Marsh Sherrardspark Wood Tewinbury Therfield Heath Thorley Flood Pound Tring Reservoirs Tring Woodlands Turnford and Cheshunt Pits Wain Wood Water End Swallow Holes Whippendell Wood Wormley-Hoddesdonpark Wood North Wormley-Hoddesdonpark Wood South Geological Castle Lime Works Quarry Downfield Pit, Westmill Hillcollins Pit Little Heath Pit Moor Mill Quarry, West Oughtonhead Lane Westwood Quarry v t e Local nature reserves in Hertfordshire Broxbourne Cheshunt Park Top Field and Cozens Grove Dacorum Howe Grove Wood Shrubhill Common East Hertfordshire Waterford Heath Hertsmere Fisher's Field Furzefield Wood and Lower Halfpenny Hilfield Park Reservoir North Hertfordshire Ivel Springs Norton Common Oughtonhead Common Purwell Meadows Therfield Heath Weston Hills St Albans Batford Springs Colney Heath Marshalls Heath Watercress Wildlife Site Wheathampstead The Wick Three Rivers Chorleywood Common Chorleywood House Estate Croxley Common Moor Oxhey Woods Prestwick Road Meadows Rickmansworth Aquadrome Stockers Lake The Withey Beds Watford Albans Wood Cassiobury Park Garston Park Harebreaks Wood The Lairage Land Welwyn Hatfield The Commons Danesbury Park Howe Dell Mardley Heath Northaw Great Wood Country Park Oxleys Wood Sherrardspark Wood Singlers Marsh Stanborough Reedmarsh Authority control General VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Other MusicBrainz ( area ) 
