https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Mymms
North Mymms
2021-02-05 00:00:00
North Mymms is a civil parish in the English county of Hertfordshire . At the 2011 Census the civil parish had a population of 8,921. The village itself is an enclosure . North Mymms Park and Brookmans Park enclose large areas of the parish. Even the parish church (St Mary's) stands in the park of North Mymms; in it is a chapel, the burialplace of the Coningsbys. There is a monument to Robert Knolles, also of North Mymms Place, dated 1458, and a brass to a priest. There is a large monument to Lord Somers , Baron Evesham, and lord chancellor in the time of William III, d. 1716. The monument was erected by his sister, Lady Elizabeth Jekyll. North Mymms Place The civil parish includes: North Mymms Place: The Elizabethan house of 1576 belonged to the Coningsby family. John Conningsby died in 1544 and entailed the house to his wife, Elizabeth, during her lifetime. Elizabeth remarried to William Dodds. On Elizabeth's and subsequently William's death, the house reverted to John's son, Henry in 1576, which he then demolished and built a new mansion house between 1576-1578. Tree-ring dating of the main roof timbers confirms these dates. During the ownership of Thomas Coningsby , a Royalist leader in Hertfordshire , the house was plundered by the Parliamentarians. Later North Mymms Park belonged to the Hyde family. The house is famous for its collection of tapestries and for its panelling and fittings. An early 17th-century painted frieze of the " Nine Worthies " was rediscovered in the 20th century. North Mymms House was a location for the 1983 film The Wicked Lady , starring Faye Dunaway as a bored aristocratic lady who takes up highway robbery, while the exterior appeared in Agatha Christie's Marple ' s The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side as the house of Marina Gregg. Bell Bar Brookmans Park : The park includes the former park of Gobions (demolished), once the property of Sir Thomas More , and around the turn of the 19th century to an East India merchant, Thomas Holmes, whose daughter became the novelist Ann Doherty . A lofty castellated gateway in the park is now called "The Folly". In 1956 North Mymms Parish Council acquired the land and the lake now known as Gobions Open Space. Water End Welham Green North Mymms is also home to the Hawkshead Campus of the Royal Veterinary College , part of the University of London . The campus also includes the Equine Referral Hospital, and the Queen Mother Hospital for Animals. At the 2011 Census the population was 8,921. Etymology [ edit ] North Mymms is spelt differently from its sister village of South Mimms.  The spellings Mymms and Mimms appear to have been used interchangeably over the centuries, until 20 February 1939 when Hertfordshire County Council decided that the spelling be fixed as Mymms . References [ edit ] ^ "Civil Parish population 2011" . Neighbourhood Statistics . Office for National Statistics . Retrieved 31 October 2016 . ^ North Mymms History Project Retrieved 21 August 2019. ^ Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead Campus Website: http://www.rvc.ac.uk/About/Campuses/Hawkshead.cfm ^ "Civil Parish population 2011" . Neighbourhood Statistics . Office for National Statistics . Retrieved 26 October 2016 . ^ North Mymms History Project: https://www.northmymmshistory.uk/2018/02/north-mymms-and-south-mimms.html External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to North Mymms . North Mymms News Community news and information website. North Mymms History Project Curating and digitising the history of North Mymms North Mymms Parish Council Victoria County History of North Mymms 1908 North Mymms - Parish and People North Mymms Park Official Website North Mymms Youth Project a large thriving youth club based in the Parish AFC Mymms Football Club North Mymms Cricket Club Coordinates : 51°43′33″N 0°14′01″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.72593°N 0.23359°W ﻿ / 51.72593; -0.23359 v t e Civil parishes in Hertfordshire Dacorum (partly parished) Parishes Aldbury Berkhamsted Bovingdon Chipperfield Flamstead Flaunden Great Gaddesden Kings Langley Little Gaddesden Markyate Nash Mills Nettleden with Potten End Northchurch Tring Tring Rural Wigginton Unparished area Hemel Hempstead East Hertfordshire (wholly parished) Albury Anstey Ardeley Aspenden Aston Bayford Bengeo Rural Benington Bishop's Stortford Bramfield Braughing Brent Pelham Brickendon Liberty Buckland Buntingford Cottered Datchworth Eastwick Gilston Furneux Pelham Great Amwell Great Munden Hertford Hertford Heath Hertingfordbury High Wych Hormead Hunsdon Little Berkhamsted Little Hadham Little Munden Meesden Much Hadham Sacombe Sawbridgeworth Standon Stanstead Abbots Stanstead St Margarets Stapleford Stocking Pelham Tewin Thorley Thundridge Walkern Ware Wareside Watton-at-Stone Westmill Widford Wyddial Hertsmere (partly parished) Parishes Aldenham Elstree and Borehamwood Ridge Shenley South Mimms Unparished areas Bushey Potters Bar North Hertfordshire (partly parished) Parishes Ashwell Barkway Barley Bygrave Caldecote Clothall Codicote Graveley Great Ashby Hexton Hinxworth Holwell Ickleford Kelshall Kimpton King's Walden Knebworth Langley Lilley Newnham Nuthampstead Offley Pirton Preston Radwell Reed Royston Rushden Sandon St Ippolyts St Paul's Walden Therfield Wallington Weston Wymondley Unparished areas Baldock Hitchin Letchworth St Albans (partly parished) Parishes Colney Heath Harpenden Harpenden Rural London Colney Redbourn Sandridge St Michael St Stephen Wheathampstead Unparished area St Albans Three Rivers (partly parished) Parishes Abbots Langley Batchworth Chorleywood Croxley Green Sarratt Watford Rural Unparished areas Rickmansworth (parts not within Batchworth or Croxley Green parishes) Welwyn Hatfield (partly parished) Parishes Ayot St Lawrence Ayot St Peter Essendon Hatfield North Mymms Northaw and Cuffley Welwyn Woolmer Green Unparished area Welwyn Garden City Wholly unparished boroughs Broxbourne (containing Cheshunt and Hoddesdon ) Stevenage Watford See also List of places in Hertfordshire 
