https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northumberland_County_Cricket_Club
Northumberland County Cricket Club
2022-01-13 00:00:00
English Cricket  Club Northumberland County Cricket Club Team information Founded 1895 Home ground Osborne Avenue, Jesmond History MCCC wins 0 MCCAT wins 1 FP Trophy wins 0 Official website Northumberland County Cricket Club Northumberland County Cricket Club is one of twenty minor county clubs within the domestic cricket structure of England and Wales . It represents the historic county of Northumberland . The team is currently a member of the Minor Counties Championship Eastern Division and plays in the MCCA Knockout Trophy . Northumberland played List A matches occasionally from 1971 until 2005 but is not classified as a List A team per se . The club is based at Osborne Avenue, Jesmond and also plays matches around the county at Benwell Park and at the South Northumberland CC ground at Gosforth . Contents 1 Honours 2 Earliest cricket 3 Origin of club 4 Club history 5 Notable players 6 References 7 Further reading Honours [ edit ] Minor Counties Championship (0) - ; shared (0) - MCCA Knockout Trophy (1) - 2006 Earliest cricket [ edit ] Cricket probably reached Northumberland during the 18th century.  According to Bowen, the earliest reference to cricket in the county was in 1766. Origin of club [ edit ] A county organisation existed in 1834.  The present Northumberland CCC was founded in December 1895 and joined the Minor Counties Championship in the second season of the competition, 1896. It has remained there ever since with the exception of 1898, when it did not compete. Club history [ edit ] The view from the street outside of one of the club's venues, Osborne Avenue, Jesmond . Northumberland has never won the Minor Counties Championship. Northumberland won the MCCA Knockout Trophy for the first time in August 2006, beating Dorset in the final. Notable players [ edit ] The following Northumberland cricketers made an impact on the first-class game: Leslie Townsend Stan Worthington Eddie Phillipson Colin Atkinson Jack van Geloven Norman Graham Ben Harmison Mark Wood For a complete list of players who appeared in List A cricket for Northumberland, see List of Northumberland CCC List A players . References [ edit ] ^ "List A events played by Northumberland" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 7 January 2016 . Northumberland County Cricket Club website Minor Counties Cricket Association Official Site Further reading [ edit ] Rowland Bowen , Cricket: A History of its Growth and Development , Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970 G B Buckley , Fresh Light on 18th Century Cricket , Cotterell, 1935 E W Swanton (editor), Barclays World of Cricket , Guild, 1986 Playfair Cricket Annual – various editions Wisden Cricketers' Almanack – various editions v t e Northumberland County Cricket Club Northumberland County Cricket Club Northumberland Women Players Current squad List A players Category:Northumberland cricketers Grounds Current grounds Derwenthaugh Park, Swalwell Osborne Avenue, Jesmond Roseworth Terrace, Gosforth Previous grounds Northumberland Club Ground, Heaton Preston Avenue, North Shields Langwell Crescent, Ashington Denton Bank, Benwell Hill Longhirst Hall Ground, near Morpeth ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Northumberland County Cricket Club captains Records Northumberland List A cricket records v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight This article about a cricket team in England is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e 
