https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxfordshire_County_Cricket_Club
Oxfordshire County Cricket Club
2022-01-12 00:00:00
Oxfordshire County Cricket Club Team information Founded 1921 Home ground Various History Minor Counties Championship wins 4 Official website Oxfordshire CCC Oxfordshire County Cricket Club is one of twenty minor county clubs within the domestic cricket structure of England and Wales . It represents the historic county of Oxfordshire . The team is currently a member of the Minor Counties Championship Western Division and plays in the MCCA Knockout Trophy . Oxfordshire played List A matches occasionally from 1967 until 2004 but is not classified as a List A team per se . Contents 1 Grounds 2 Honours 3 Earliest cricket 4 Origin of club 5 Club history 6 Notable players 7 References 8 External links 9 Further reading Grounds [ edit ] The club plays matches at Banbury CC, Great & Little Tew, Challow and Childrey , Radley College & Bicester & North Oxford, Aston Rowant and Thame. There are plans to expand this range of venues. Oxfordshire County Cricket Club is an integrated part of the Oxfordshire Cricket Board. Honours [ edit ] National Counties Championship (5) - 1929, 1974, 1982, 1989, 2021; shared (0) - NCCA Knockout Trophy (0) - Earliest cricket [ edit ] Cricket probably reached Oxfordshire by the end of the 16th century.  Although "not cricket", a 1523 reference to stoolball has been found (see Rowland Bowen's history) re a designated field in Oxfordshire. The earliest reference to cricket in the county is at the University of Oxford in 1673. Dr Samuel Johnson stated that he played cricket during his time at the university; he was there in 1729 for one year only. One of the earliest references to cricket in Oxfordshire was in the Reading Mercury on Monday 4 October 1779: "On Tues. Oct 5 at Henley, the County of Berks v the County of Oxford, for £25 a side".  This is the first time we read of an Oxfordshire county team. Berkshire was rated a first-class team at the time but this was a minor match. Origin of club [ edit ] There was a county organisation in 1787, according to Wisden .  Oxfordshire competed in the first two Minor Counties Championship competitions in 1895 and 1896, and an Oxfordshire side also appeared in the competition from 1900 to 1906. The present Oxfordshire CCC was founded on 14 December 1921 and has been a member of the Minor Counties since the 1922 season. Club history [ edit ] Oxfordshire has won the Minor Counties Championship five times. It won the title outright in 1929, 1974, 1982, 1989 and 2021. Oxfordshire has never won the MCCA Knockout Trophy since its inception in 1983 but in recent years has suffered 2 narrow final defeats. Notable players [ edit ] See List of Oxfordshire CCC List A players and Category:Oxfordshire cricketers The following Oxfordshire cricketers also made an impact on the first-class game: Daniel Rowe John Arnold Jonathan Batty Buck Divecha Andrew Strauss Robert Cunliffe Tim Hancock Charles Williams , later Lord Williams of Elvel , sometime UK government minister References [ edit ] ^ "List A events played by Oxfordshire" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 3 January 2016 . External links [ edit ] Oxfordshire Cricket Board site Oxfordshire County Cricket Club website Minor Counties Cricket Association Official Site Further reading [ edit ] Rowland Bowen , Cricket: A History of its Growth and Development , Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970 E W Swanton (editor), Barclays World of Cricket , Guild, 1986 Playfair Cricket Annual – various editions Wisden Cricketers' Almanack – various editions v t e Oxfordshire County Cricket Club Oxfordshire County Cricket Club Oxfordshire Women Players List A players Category:Oxfordshire cricketers Grounds Current grounds Church Meadow, Thame Butt's Way, Kingston Blount Vicarage Hill, East Challow White Post Road, Bodicote Sir Paul Getty's Ground, Wormsley Magdalen College School Field, Oxford Previous grounds Christ Church Ground, Oxford Morris Motors Sports Ground, Cowley Oxford County School Ground, Thame Britannia Works Ground, Banbury Hertford College Ground, Oxford New College Ground, Oxford Merton College Ground, Oxford Burford Road, Shipton-under-Wychwood Blenheim Palace, Woodstock St John's College Ground, Oxford Trinity College Ground, Oxford Northern Aluminium Company Ground, Banbury Grange Road, Banbury Lincoln College Ground, Oxford St Edward's School Ground, Oxford Smith's Industries Ground, Witney Roman Way Sports Ground, Oxford Pressed Steel Fisher Sports Ground, Cowley The Brakspear Ground, Remenham Witney Mills Ground Abingdon War Memorial Field Banbury Twenty Cricket Club Ground University Parks, Oxford Bicester and North Oxford Cricket Club Ground, Chesterton Radley College, Abingdon Ledwell Road, Great Tew ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Oxfordshire County Cricket Club captains Records Oxfordshire List A cricket records v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight 
