https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wales_National_County_Cricket_Club
Wales National County Cricket Club
2022-08-19 00:00:00
Wales National County Cricket Club Personnel Captain Darren Thomas Team information Founded 1988 Home ground Various History National Counties Championship wins 0 NCCA Knockout Trophy wins 0 Official website Wales NCCC Wales National County Cricket Club is one of twenty National county clubs within the domestic cricket structure of England and Wales . It represents all of the historic counties of Wales except Glamorgan and is currently the only non-English member of the National Counties Cricket Championship . The team is currently a member of the National Counties Cricket Championship Western Division, having joined in 1988 after Somerset 's second eleven left the competition, and plays in the NCCA Knockout Trophy . Wales National County played List A matches occasionally from 1993 until 2005 but is not classified as a List A team per se . Contents 1 Club history 2 Notable players 3 Grounds 4 References Club history [ edit ] Some Welsh counties formerly competed individually in the National Counties Cricket Championship. Glamorgan was easily the most successful and it became first-class in 1921. The others were Carmarthenshire from 1908 to 1911; Denbighshire from 1930 to 1935; and Monmouthshire from 1901 to 1934. Following the withdrawal of the Somerset Second XI from National Counties cricket at the end of the 1987 season , Wales Minor Counties entered National Counties cricket for the 1988 season as their replacement. However Wales National County is yet to win the National Counties Cricket Championship or the NCCA Knockout Trophy . The club first played List A cricket in the 1993 NatWest Trophy against Sussex . The club appeared in eighteen List A matches from 1993 to 2005, winning eight and losing ten, the majority of which were against first-class opponents. Wales National County lost the right to play List A cricket when the National Counties were excluded from the Cheltenham & Gloucester Trophy from the 2006 season onward. Notable players [ edit ] See List of Wales Minor Counties Cricket Club List A players and Category:Wales National County cricketers The following Wales Minor Counties/National County cricketers also made an impact on the first-class game or are of note in other fields: Colin Metson Danny Collins Phil Simmons Alexander French Grounds [ edit ] The club has no fixed home, but plays its home matches at various grounds across Wales. Grounds used for the 2011 season included: Eugene Cross Park , Ebbw Vale Pen-y-Pound, Abergavenny Ffosyrefail Ground , Pontarddulais Usk Cricket Club Ground, Usk References [ edit ] ^ "List A events played by Wales Minor Counties" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 3 January 2016 . ^ a b "List A Matches played by Wales Minor Counties" . CricketArchive . Retrieved 22 August 2011 . ^ Briggs, Simon (24 December 2004). "Minor counties denied their day in sun" . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 22 August 2011 . v t e National Counties cricket in England and Wales Competitions National Counties Cricket Championship NCCA Knockout Trophy National Counties T20 Western Division Berkshire Cheshire Cornwall Devon Dorset Herefordshire Oxfordshire Shropshire Wales National County Wiltshire Eastern Division Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cumbria Hertfordshire Lincolnshire Norfolk Northumberland Staffordshire Suffolk Former National counties Durham Glamorgan Northamptonshire Worcestershire Defunct Minor counties Carmarthenshire Channel Islands Denbighshire Monmouthshire Other National counties Huntingdonshire Isle of Wight 
