https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watford_Town_Cricket_Club_Ground
Watford Town Cricket Club Ground
2022-05-16 00:00:00
Watford Town Cricket Club Ground Ground information Location Watford , Hertfordshire Establishment 1944 (first recorded match) Team information Middlesex (1981) Hertfordshire (1976–1991) As of 25 July 2010 Source: Ground profile Watford Town Cricket Club Ground, at Woodside Playing Fields, is a cricket ground on the northern outskirts of Watford , Hertfordshire . The first recorded match on the ground was in 1944, when the Combined Services played Northamptonshire . In 1976, the ground hosted its first Minor Counties Championship match when Hertfordshire played Norfolk . From 1976 to 1991, the ground played host to 11 Minor Counties Championship matches and a single MCCA Knockout Trophy match. The ground has also hosted List-A matches. The first List-A match held on the ground came in the 1977 Benson & Hedges Cup when Minor Counties West played Derbyshire . The following year the ground was used once again by Minor Counties West in the 1978 competition against Lancashire . The following year Minor Counties South used the ground as a home venue, in a match against Glamorgan . In 1980, a combined Minor Counties team played against Essex in the 1980 Benson & Hedges Cup. In 1981, Middlesex used the ground for a List-A match against the touring Sri Lankans . In 1983 the ground was selected to host a 'warm-up' match ahead of the World Cup, between India and New Zealand. The quality of the pitches was the main reason for the selection of an amateur club's ground, thanks to the efforts and expertise of groundsman Peter Southam who was an employee of Watford Borough (which still owns Woodside) and devoted his time and attention to the Woodside sports pitches, especially cricket and bowls. In local domestic cricket, Watford Town Cricket Club Ground is the home ground of Watford Town Cricket Club . In May 2021 Watford Borough Council announced plans to improve the Woodside Playing Fields park area, including a new cricket pavilion. References [ edit ] ^ Minor Counties Championship Matches played on Watford Town Cricket Club Ground ^ Minor Counties Trophy Matches played on Watford Town Cricket Club Ground ^ Watford Town Cricket Club External links [ edit ] Watford Town Cricket Club Ground on CricketArchive Watford Town Cricket Club Ground on Cricinfo Coordinates : 51°41′36.66″N 0°23′44.41″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.6935167°N 0.3956694°W ﻿ / 51.6935167; -0.3956694 v t e Middlesex County Cricket Club Middlesex County Cricket Club Middlesex Women Players Current squad List of players Category:Middlesex cricketers Grounds Current grounds Lord's Uxbridge Cricket Club Ground Old Deer Park, Richmond Merchant Taylors' School, Northwood Brunton Memorial Ground, Radlett Previous grounds Cattle Market Ground, Islington Lillie Bridge, West Brompton Prince's Cricket Ground, Chelsea Chiswick Park Cricket Ground Tivoli Road, Hornsey Watford Town Cricket Club Ground Lincoln Road Ground, Enfield Walker Cricket Ground, Southgate Denis Compton Oval, Shenley Captains List of Middlesex cricket captains Records First-class List A Twenty20 Seasons 2005 v t e Hertfordshire County Cricket Club Hertfordshire County Cricket Club Hertfordshire Women Players List A players Category:Hertfordshire cricketers Grounds Current grounds Cricketfield Lane, Bishop's Stortford Balls Park, Hertford London Road, Tring Brunton Memorial Ground, Radlett Digswell Park, Welwyn Garden City The Common, Harpenden Previous grounds Lucas Lane, Hitchin Ditchmore Lane, Stevenage Clarence Park, St Albans Park Avenue, Watford Broxbourne Sports Club Ground, Broxbourne Manor House Ground, Bushey Albury Ride, Cheshunt Crossman's Ground, Barkway Porters Park, Radlett Letchworth Corner Hyde Hall, Sawbridgeworth Durrants Sports Ground, Croxley Green Barnet Lane County Hall Ground, Hertford Woodside, Watford The Walk, Potters Bar Denis Compton Oval, Shenley Marlins, Long Marston Home Farm, North Mymms Whitehorn Lane, Letchworth ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Hertfordshire County Cricket Club captains Records Hertfordshire List A cricket records 
