https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wormsley_Park
Wormsley Park
2022-11-08 00:00:00
Country house in Buckinghamshire, UK Wormsley Wormsley is a private estate of Mark Getty and his family, set in 2,700-acre (1,100 ha) of rolling countryside in the Chiltern Hills of Buckinghamshire (formerly Oxfordshire ), England. It is also the home of Garsington Opera . Acquired by Sir Paul Getty in 1985, the estate forms part of Hambleden valley, running from Stokenchurch to Turville . Wormsley is known for its library, its cricket ground, its two-acre walled garden, its shoot, and the vistas and landscapes of the estate grounds. It also rents space for events and  television and filming work. Contents 1 History 2 Cricket ground 3 References 4 External links History [ edit ] The estate was founded by the Scrope family in the late 16th century. It belonged to Colonel Adrian Scrope , the regicide , and passed to his grandson John Scrope , a baron of the Exchequer who died without issue. The estate passed to the descendants of his sister Anne (died 1721), who had married Henry Fane of Brympton . Their second son, Thomas Fane , also a Bristol merchant, succeeded his uncle as Member of Parliament for Lyme Regis , beginning the Fane family's long association with the seat. Fane also succeeded a distant cousin and became 8th Earl of Westmoreland in 1762. The Fane family sold the 18th-century house and estate in 1986 to Sir Paul Getty and his wife Victoria Holdsworth . Getty restored the house and estate, adding a library to accommodate his book collection, and a theatre where performances were held for invited guests. The area is known for its population of red kites . Once extinct in England and Scotland, the birds were reintroduced into England beginning in 1989. The area was not originally planned to be the first release site. It was originally intended to be Windsor Great Park , but at the last minute the landowner pulled out and the project nearly collapsed. Getty stepped in and offered Wormsley as an alternative. In 2011, Garsington Opera moved from Garsington Manor near Oxford to a purpose-built pavilion in the grounds of Wormsley. Cricket ground [ edit ] Sir Paul Getty's Ground Ground information Location near Stokenchurch , Buckinghamshire Establishment 1992 (first recorded match) International information First women's Test 11–15 August 2013: England v Australia Last women's Test 13–17 August 2014: England v India First WODI 5 July 2009: England v Australia Last WODI 11 July 2012: England v India Team information Unicorns (2010–present) Buckinghamshire (1999–2005) As of 5 September 2020 Source: cricketarchive.com After Mick Jagger introduced him to cricket , Getty built a ground  in 1992 with a mock-Tudor pavilion. The Queen Mother and the Prime Minister, John Major , attended the first match, along with Michael Caine , Denis Compton and Brian Johnston . Over the final decade of his life, Getty invited teams to play at what is now known as "Sir Paul Getty's Ground" with the teams ranging from world-class sides to youth sides. Those who have played there include cricketers Andrew Flintoff , Imran Khan , Mike Gatting , Mike Atherton , Mark Ramprakash , Derek Randall , James Anderson and Mike Brearley and entertainment figures such as Peter O'Toole , Tim Rice , and Rory Bremner . [ citation needed ] Touring international sides have played at Wormsley with the Australians, West Indians, Sri Lankans and South Africans all having made appearances at the ground. It was the venue for the only Test match of the Australian women's tour of England in 2013. References [ edit ] ^ Christiansen, Rupert (2 November 2010). "Garsington gears up for glorious pastures new" . The Daily Telegraph . ^ "About Wormsley" . Wormsley Cricket . Archived from the original on 2011-04-23 . Retrieved 2011-03-29 . ^ Stephan Shemilt. "Women's Ashes 2013: New format, new era for England" . BBC Sport . Retrieved 4 October 2015 . External links [ edit ] Media related to Wormsley Park at Wikimedia Commons Wormsley Estate - main website Garsington Opera - Wormsley Estate Coordinates : 51°38′41″N 0°56′03″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.644693°N 0.934224°W ﻿ / 51.644693; -0.934224 v t e Buckinghamshire County Cricket Club Buckinghamshire County Cricket Club Buckinghamshire Women Players List A players Category:Buckinghamshire cricketers Grounds Current grounds London Road, High Wycombe Amy Lane, Chesham Dukes Lane, Gerrards Cross London Road, Tring Previous grounds Shardeloes, Amersham Pound Lane, Marlow Wilton Park, Beaconsfield Dinton Cricket Club Ground Ascott Park, Wing Sir Paul Getty's Ground The Big Field, Wolverton Wendover Road, Aylesbury Bletchley Park Osborne Street, Wolverton Chalvey Road, Slough Sefton Park, Stoke Poges Agar's Plough, Eton College Stowe School Aspro Sports Ground, Slough Ernest Turner's Sports Ground, High Wycombe Bourton Road, Buckingham Molins Sports Club, Monks Risborough Manor Fields, Bletchley Campbell Park, Milton Keynes The Memorial Ground, Burnham Upton Court Road, Slough ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Buckinghamshire County Cricket Club captains Records Buckinghamshire List A cricket records v t e Oxfordshire County Cricket Club Oxfordshire County Cricket Club Oxfordshire Women Players List A players Category:Oxfordshire cricketers Grounds Current grounds Church Meadow, Thame Butt's Way, Kingston Blount Vicarage Hill, East Challow White Post Road, Bodicote Sir Paul Getty's Ground, Wormsley Magdalen College School Field, Oxford Previous grounds Christ Church Ground, Oxford Morris Motors Sports Ground, Cowley Oxford County School Ground, Thame Britannia Works Ground, Banbury Hertford College Ground, Oxford New College Ground, Oxford Merton College Ground, Oxford Burford Road, Shipton-under-Wychwood Blenheim Palace, Woodstock St John's College Ground, Oxford Trinity College Ground, Oxford Northern Aluminium Company Ground, Banbury Grange Road, Banbury Lincoln College Ground, Oxford St Edward's School Ground, Oxford Smith's Industries Ground, Witney Roman Way Sports Ground, Oxford Pressed Steel Fisher Sports Ground, Cowley The Brakspear Ground, Remenham Witney Mills Ground Abingdon War Memorial Field Banbury Twenty Cricket Club Ground University Parks, Oxford Bicester and North Oxford Cricket Club Ground, Chesterton Radley College, Abingdon Ledwell Road, Great Tew ( Full list of grounds ) Captains List of Oxfordshire County Cricket Club captains Records Oxfordshire List A cricket records 
